[Amit Varma]: If you set out to change the world, where do you even begin?
[Amit Varma]: Some might start by changing themselves, be the change you want to see.
[Amit Varma]: But that has a limited impact on the world.
[Amit Varma]: To make a bigger difference, you need to change the views of others, be an activist even.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe you do this by writing op-eds in columns.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe you do morchas on the streets.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe you become a mover and shaker in politics to shake things up.
[Amit Varma]: If you really care, then over time, you figure out those small ways in which you can help
[Amit Varma]: bring about big change.
[Amit Varma]: My guest on the show today thought long and hard about how he could help change the world.
[Amit Varma]: Fired up by deep emotion, he forged the road ahead with cold logic.
[Amit Varma]: Can there be a better combination?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bhardwaj.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Parmesh Shahani, founder of the famous Godrej India Culture Lab and
[Amit Varma]: an advocate of LGBTQ inclusion in corporate India.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, that's right, in corporate India.
[Amit Varma]: Even as Indian society changes slowly, Parmesh works with corporates to help make them friendlier
[Amit Varma]: and more open spaces for LGBTQ people.
[Amit Varma]: He's written a fabulous book about this called Queeristan, which he describes as memoir plus
[Amit Varma]: manifesto.
[Amit Varma]: I was delighted to have him on The Seen and The Unseen to share his thoughts with me.
[Amit Varma]: Before we move on to our conversation, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to The Seen and The Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and The Unseen has been a labor of love for me.
[Amit Varma]: I've enjoyed putting together many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe,
[Amit Varma]: and hopefully yours as well.
[Amit Varma]: But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off the show.
[Amit Varma]: Although The Seen and The Unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really woken
[Amit Varma]: up to the insane engagement level of podcasts.
[Amit Varma]: And I do many, many hours of deep research for each episode, besides all the logistics
[Amit Varma]: of producing the show myself, scheduling guests, booking studios, paying technicians, the travel
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So, well, I'm trying a new way of keeping this thing going, and that involves you.
[Amit Varma]: My proposition for you is this.
[Amit Varma]: For every episode of The Seen and The Unseen that you enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or
[Amit Varma]: even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel it's worth.
[Amit Varma]: You can do this by heading over to seenunseen.in slash support and contributing an amount of
[Amit Varma]: your choice.
[Amit Varma]: This is not a subscription.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and The Unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps and at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: This is just a gesture of appreciation, help keep this thing going seenunseen.in slash
[Amit Varma]: support.
[Amit Varma]: Parmesh, welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Guest]: I'm very happy to be here.
[Guest]: I remember we were at TED in 2009, that evening in Mysore, music, happiness, so much possibility.
[Guest]: Did you imagine 11 years later, here we would be?
[Amit Varma]: What's kind of fascinating is that, you know, just for the listeners, we were both TED India
[Amit Varma]: fellows when TED happened in Mysore in 2009, the actual TED, not some TEDx.
[Amit Varma]: And Parmesh and I were both TED India fellows.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing is that for me, it was just an event, it came and it went
[Amit Varma]: and it was nice to meet all these people, but I didn't think much about it.
[Amit Varma]: But reading your book, I sort of realized that it's played a slightly more important
[Amit Varma]: role in your journey than in mine, which is, you know, so interesting to me how, you know,
[Amit Varma]: these the same event can have such a different impact on people.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you've described your book at the start as a memoir plus manifesto.
[Amit Varma]: And it kind of seemed to me that even the manifesto part of it in a sense is, it's almost
[Amit Varma]: a lived manifesto.
[Amit Varma]: So that's also in a sense, it arises out of the memoir.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd like to sort of before we get to your book, which I really enjoyed reading and learn
[Amit Varma]: from, but before we get there, I'd like to kind of explore the memoir part a bit and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, ask you more about your personal journey, and how that's been.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit about that about, you know, growing up as a middle class kid, first in
[Amit Varma]: Colaba, then you went to the Middle East, coming back to Bombay, navigating all of that.
[Guest]: Tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: So yeah, it was interesting to reflect, to look back in the book.
[Guest]: The aim was always, I think with both my books, right, Gay Bombay that came out first, Gay
[Guest]: Bombay actually was the book that got me into that Ted India, because the book had come
[Guest]: out in 2008, and I applied using that and, you know, I got to come to this conference
[Guest]: and like meet all of you, you know.
[Guest]: So even there, even that book, which was very much an ethnography, that was an academic
[Guest]: book that came out of my MIT program, that came out of research.
[Guest]: So it was digital ethnography, it was anthropology, it was LGBTQ studies, it was so many of those
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: And over there, I kind of had placed myself in the middle of all the stories I was telling.
[Guest]: And this format actually comes very much from my schooling and from my, not while growing
[Guest]: up, but from my academic training.
[Guest]: So the program that I did at MIT, for example, comparative media studies, is something that
[Guest]: Henry Jenkins, William Eurekio, these incredible scholars whom I love and admire so much began.
[Guest]: And it was very much a program that kind of, I mean, you know, I want to use the word queer
[Guest]: here.
[Guest]: It queered media studies, because it kind of queered academia, not in the sense of talking
[Guest]: about queers, which of course it does, queer people, queer lives, queer hopes, but also
[Guest]: how do you do academia?
[Guest]: How do you tell stories?
[Guest]: And that's also been the kind of change in anthropology over the years, from a researcher
[Guest]: being someone who goes to a distant land to study the other, and lives in, immerses themselves
[Guest]: into that culture, and then writes up about it as a distant observer.
[Guest]: Anthropology over the years, media studies, all these disciplines have become very much
[Guest]: about the intimate, about what does it mean when you study your own self?
[Guest]: What does it mean to reflect, you know, on your own journey while you are studying others
[Guest]: like you, not others different from you?
[Guest]: And what does that do to the research?
[Guest]: So the method of Queeristan, which is deep, personal, mixed with facts, figures, data,
[Guest]: other people's stories, was actually, I mean, I've honed it more in Queeristan, but, you
[Guest]: know, the initial experiment almost was Gay Bombay.
[Guest]: And that came from my training, which also kind of validated.
[Guest]: So one of the beautiful things about being in that program was, you know, my professors
[Guest]: were like, your background matters, your experience matters.
[Guest]: You know, we don't want to wipe out everything you are, and where you've come from, and train
[Guest]: you to be a particular kind of scholar.
[Guest]: We want you to inform your scholarship with all of these.
[Guest]: And that was so amazing that, you know, and you know, Henry was an incredible mentor,
[Guest]: especially in this.
[Guest]: And if you see his own scholarship, right, whether about comics or video games, or Star
[Guest]: Wars, he actually started the field of fandom studies, you know, which now over the years
[Guest]: has become, you know, a legit academic pursuit.
[Guest]: He was like, it's all, it's all about the personal, right?
[Guest]: So that personal memoir meets manifesto thing has its origins, I mean, in my training, in
[Guest]: the validation I got from my program that you can talk about, you know, you can reflect
[Guest]: on your own journey, seriously.
[Guest]: And I tried to do that for various reasons, because I thought it was also very, very important
[Guest]: in Queeristan, which is a business book.
[Guest]: And so many of the business books that I was reading, or that I tried to read, to prepare
[Guest]: for this, were just about business, or they just put you in and they said, you know, five
[Guest]: things to do, six things to do, case study here.
[Guest]: I was yearning, I was thirsting to know more about the people behind those decisions, right?
[Guest]: Why are you doing this?
[Guest]: Why are you recommending I do these five things, or like, why are you recommending I swim in
[Guest]: this blue ocean?
[Guest]: Or, you know, why are you, like, I kind of thought that it would be really nice to write
[Guest]: a deeply personal business book.
[Guest]: Because in a sense, what I was also trying to do in this book was to visibilize, right?
[Guest]: So large parts of the book are, you know, cases, steps, etc.
[Guest]: But really a large part of the book is, you know, for people who might not have met queer
[Guest]: people, you know, this is us.
[Guest]: This is our lives, right?
[Guest]: This is my life.
[Guest]: This is my personal journey.
[Guest]: This is what has happened to me when my family has accepted and my company has accepted.
[Guest]: This is how my background has played into, you know, the privileges that I have, and
[Guest]: that I can use at this point to kind of strategize in whatever way I can for, you know, to create
[Guest]: a more inclusive playing field, and things like this.
[Guest]: I thought it was very important to put all those personal bits in, even before we reach
[Guest]: the business path.
[Guest]: So a reader kind of knows me, they're like, ah, we understand this Parmesh, we understand
[Guest]: not just where he's come from, but, you know, also, all the other things in the book, right?
[Guest]: So I thought that also kind of would open them up more to kind of have that empathy
[Guest]: to understand the case, and then to do which is what I really want them to do at the end
[Guest]: of the book, which is implement those steps.
[Guest]: So the personal, putting that personal in was very strategic, and it has always been
[Guest]: very strategic for me in both my books.
[Guest]: It's not indulgence.
[Guest]: It's very much a conscious act of creating that link of empathy with my readers so that
[Amit Varma]: they come with me on this journey.
[Amit Varma]: So I had a couple of observations, a second one sort of going into a question, and they're
[Amit Varma]: both kind of tangential.
[Amit Varma]: And one is that, firstly, I think that worked beautifully, the fusing of the personal with
[Amit Varma]: whatever the book is about.
[Amit Varma]: So it never felt like a business book that Manifesto feel doesn't really come across.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, out of the five parts, you could say the fourth part is one which actually, you
[Amit Varma]: know, talks about what companies can do.
[Amit Varma]: And even there, you've weaved in the personal, but it worked beautifully in the story.
[Amit Varma]: My second observation and also perhaps a question is that, you know, one of the other questions
[Amit Varma]: I had, which I first noted down before I even started reading the book that I want to ask
[Amit Varma]: Parmesh about, you know, when he was growing up, the process of getting comfortable in
[Amit Varma]: his own skin, which is hard for anyone, which was hard for me as well.
[Amit Varma]: So it doesn't matter what your sexuality or anything might be.
[Amit Varma]: All of us are so anxious about fitting into the world and just reaching that stage where
[Amit Varma]: we are comfortable with who we are is a journey in itself.
[Amit Varma]: But that seems to also have found a very interesting reflection in the voice of the book, where
[Amit Varma]: at first I was taken aback because, you know, there are so many places where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and I always say with writers, I know that when you read something by them, because the
[Amit Varma]: writing is authentic, it sounds like you can hear their voice speaking out.
[Amit Varma]: And that's even more in your case, because, you know, somewhere you'll say, no, Baba and
[Amit Varma]: you'll continue or at the end of saying something, you know, you'll say Hannah, you know, and
[Amit Varma]: which was very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, the first couple of times it startled me a bit because you don't expect
[Amit Varma]: that kind of a conversational and formal tone in a book.
[Amit Varma]: So what was sort of, you know, is that something that you thought about that the voice has
[Amit Varma]: to be me and it has to be me to the extent that it has to be, you know, that process
[Amit Varma]: of people hearing your voice feels more explicit, you know, so is that something you thought
[Amit Varma]: about?
[Amit Varma]: Did your publisher have a problem and say, what is this?
[Guest]: No, Baba, cut it out.
[Guest]: Oh, yes.
[Guest]: And I hope she's listening to this.
[Guest]: And I hope she realizes how much people like it.
[Guest]: Because we didn't have many arguments through the book.
[Guest]: But if there was one bone of contention, it was this, you know, for Westland, it was very
[Guest]: much Parmesh, this is a business book, you are not Shobha Dey.
[Guest]: And then I was like, hey, but I can be Shobha Dey.
[Guest]: And I told Shobha also this, and they were like, no, no, no, no, you know, don't forget
[Guest]: it's a business book.
[Guest]: And I was very much keen, but it's my business book, darling, I think of business is different.
[Guest]: And that was the point.
[Guest]: So we, if you read the, at some point, I think I should do a director's cut of the book with
[Guest]: all the bits that were left out.
[Guest]: If you see what was on the chopping table, it's essentially a whole bunch of this, they
[Guest]: were like, okay, I love it.
[Guest]: But I think maybe it's becoming too personal, why we need to tell this, why we have to say
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: I can you every time not say, this, this, this.
[Guest]: And I was like, but you know, this is so then we reached one.
[Guest]: Like any good editor, publisher, author relationship.
[Guest]: And I see my auntie likes to say, it was all about compromise and adjustment.
[Guest]: I was like, look, my voice is important.
[Guest]: Here is what you're going to, I, you know, I think here, I want to talk like this.
[Guest]: And they were like, okay, here is very good.
[Guest]: But maybe here, if we make it a little more serious, a little more this or that, because
[Guest]: remember, it's ultimately a business book.
[Guest]: So but I'm glad that the voice came through, because I was really afraid that, you know,
[Guest]: I really wanted it to sound like me, which is also by recording the audible version.
[Guest]: I mean, I could just read it out, because it's like, I, you know, thought of it.
[Guest]: And if you read the audible version, it's exactly like that.
[Guest]: It's like, I'm sitting next to you.
[Guest]: I'm taking you on this journey.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, the first time I came across some of those, and I think that right there
[Amit Varma]: from the preface, I was, you know, with my editor's hat on, I was a little bit like,
[Amit Varma]: okay, this, this, you know, the reader will notice this, it snaps them out of the narrative,
[Amit Varma]: is it a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: But as I went on, I found it a charming and be authentic to the person.
[Amit Varma]: So you feel that this is actually, you know, someone sitting across you and talking the
[Amit Varma]: way they talk, even if they don't know you.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought that really worked for me.
[Amit Varma]: So kind of getting back to your sort of the early part of your memoir, you know, what
[Amit Varma]: was it sort of like growing up in 80s, 90s, Mumbai, and, you know, in terms of you often
[Amit Varma]: said that you didn't have an issue with figuring out your sexuality, but with articulating
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Guest]: So take me a bit through those years and what it was like.
[Guest]: Yeah, it was.
[Guest]: I mean, everyone is nostalgic about their past.
[Guest]: And as you're saying, 80s, 90s, I'm thinking of this Bappi Lehri album called Habiba.
[Guest]: I don't know if anyone else remembers it, but you know, I do.
[Guest]: This is before Made in India.
[Guest]: This is before pop music, right?
[Guest]: This is before MTV.
[Guest]: And Bappi Lehri had released this incredible music album.
[Guest]: I mean, a non-film music album called Habiba, which I still remember so much.
[Guest]: And, you know, we were not that rich.
[Guest]: So, you know, to get a cassette was something and how much I argued with my mom saying,
[Guest]: I really want it.
[Guest]: And she was like, but, you know, it's a cassette.
[Guest]: It has one song on it.
[Guest]: You'll get tired of it.
[Guest]: Because that was essentially it was Habiba multiple times.
[Guest]: It was a single.
[Guest]: But you know, it was, yeah, it was so different.
[Guest]: It was so innocent.
[Guest]: I suppose every generation looks back at their childhood with wistfulness and, you know,
[Guest]: with that sense of innocence.
[Guest]: For me, it was also pre-internet India, right?
[Guest]: So, you know, access to information was not, was not very easy at all.
[Guest]: And in my case, it was, I mean, you know, as I write in the book, it was a very, we
[Guest]: lived in a, we were not, we were, we were middle class, I suppose, we lived in a one
[Guest]: room house in Colaba.
[Guest]: I went to St. Joseph's High School, RC Church.
[Guest]: I was in the green house, the best house.
[Guest]: And I used to go to school by BST.
[Guest]: I mean, in those days, it was a big thing, you know, because in the moment Seventh Standard
[Guest]: got over, you would wear long pants and you would say, I'm not taking the school bus,
[Guest]: because it was like a matter of pride to like, take the BST and go to school by yourself.
[Guest]: It was a big thing.
[Guest]: And I would do that.
[Guest]: And I was always very, I mean, I suppose, and, you know, I'm glad that you said that
[Guest]: even it was a process of, you know, even how does one realize one's own straightness, right?
[Guest]: I mean, it's not like, but I suppose if you're straight, and you live in a heteronormative
[Guest]: society, it's not a big thing.
[Guest]: At some point, I suppose you realize that you are attracted.
[Guest]: And then you're comfortable with it, because that's the way that everyone around you assumes
[Guest]: that you will be in any case.
[Guest]: But when you're queer, it's different, right?
[Guest]: Because you live in a society which kind of expects one thing, but I never I mean, I was
[Guest]: always really very comfortable with me, it was an 8th, 9th, 10th, that I became aware
[Guest]: of my, the fact that I was, you know, emotionally and physically attracted to other boys.
[Guest]: You know, I had a lovely boyfriend, I suppose, in school.
[Guest]: Of course, we didn't use that term, we didn't know the term.
[Guest]: But we knew that we we didn't even know the term homosexual or gay, what we knew is that
[Guest]: we liked each other.
[Guest]: And we enjoyed each other's company.
[Guest]: And you know, one thing led to the other and we were very, you know, comfortable, it seemed
[Guest]: right, it seemed natural.
[Guest]: And you know, as I write in the book about how, you know, one day we were walking holding
[Guest]: hands, and again, you know, it was, boys could hold hands and walk, I mean, even I suppose
[Guest]: today boys can, but like in those, I mean, we were very happy holding hands and walking
[Guest]: together near the gateway.
[Guest]: And one of the seniors, because I think I remember, we were in the 9th standard and
[Guest]: one of the seniors looked at us from school, he saw us and he was like, you both are homos.
[Guest]: And it was the first time we'd heard that word homos.
[Guest]: So you know, we went back home and tried to do research.
[Guest]: And the next day in school, he was like, you know, this homo is not a good thing.
[Guest]: I don't think we should be homos.
[Guest]: And I was like, I was actually quite relieved that there was a word.
[Guest]: I was like, you know, it doesn't feel like a bad thing.
[Guest]: And he was like, no, no, no, we should focus on our board exams.
[Guest]: Because you know, 10th standard is, that's what you're obsessed with.
[Guest]: And I found it very strange, because, you know, I didn't think that there was anything
[Guest]: wrong or something to be ashamed about, but he did.
[Guest]: So he kind of recoiled.
[Guest]: And I just remember, I mean, you know, it's, it was interesting.
[Guest]: It was sad, because I liked him very much.
[Guest]: And but for me, it was a good, I mean, it was always, I was always comfortable.
[Guest]: So it's just that later on, when you discover that, you know, okay, there's, it's homo,
[Guest]: there's gay, this is what it means, you learn more, you read more, you understand more earlier,
[Guest]: of course, I think, which is also why the current generation is so blessed.
[Guest]: Because you know, there are so many role models, stories, whether you know, books, films, web
[Guest]: series, websites, that talk about being queer in an Indian context.
[Guest]: Whereas, but you know, in the 80s, late 80s, early 90s, which is when I was in school growing
[Guest]: up, I mean, there was it was like, you had to like, search for like, you know, maybe
[Guest]: there will be a little clipping, talking about boy George, or maybe there'll be a hint of
[Guest]: Freddie Mercury, or maybe they will, you know, George Michael, at some point will come out
[Guest]: and it will be gasp.
[Guest]: George Michael is gay, or you know, it was that right, we were we were like, so even
[Guest]: when you're comfortable, you want a context.
[Guest]: And for me, I, you know, I, I wanted a context of being queer in a desi way, you know, all
[Guest]: the foreign role models, etc, were nice, but you know, it didn't feel like my experience.
[Guest]: And you know, which is also, I guess, why ultimately, when I went off to study further
[Guest]: and all my first book was about what does it mean to be queer and Indian, it was largely
[Guest]: about Indianness about desi pan.
[Guest]: So that's what it was growing up.
[Guest]: It was about Doordarshan and He-Man.
[Guest]: And it was about, you know, different kinds of friendships.
[Guest]: It was about long walks.
[Guest]: It was about, I guess, there were less distractions.
[Guest]: So I could, you know, spend time to read.
[Guest]: I used to live with my grandparents.
[Guest]: So one of the pleasures of my life was every evening going for a long walk with my grandfather.
[Guest]: And he would expose me, he didn't, you know, he didn't study much, but he would go for
[Guest]: like, you know, and of course, we were not rich.
[Guest]: But we would go to Jahangir Art Gallery every time a new show would open, and we would look
[Guest]: at the art, right?
[Guest]: And we would walk.
[Guest]: And I think that, so it was, it was formative years in terms of just understanding myself,
[Guest]: feeling very comfortable with who I am, but of course, not being able to share this with
[Guest]: my parents or grandparents, or even friends for that matter, because I didn't know what
[Guest]: to say, I didn't know how to articulate it.
[Guest]: And then, you know, my dad got a job in the Middle East.
[Guest]: And that was a very different kind of because in the 80s and 90s, you know, being a simple
[Guest]: middle class kid, you know, and in India, where everything is prohibited, and then suddenly
[Guest]: being able to go, and it wasn't a great job.
[Guest]: I mean, he was working in a supermarket, but it was, I mean, you know, to go on a plane
[Guest]: to be able to actually buy a Toblerone, to see a supermarket, all these things were quite
[Guest]: exciting.
[Guest]: So it was a way out of middle class mundane-ness into this really exotic world of like, wow,
[Guest]: all this happens.
[Amit Varma]: And
[Amit Varma]: in fact, the phrase that you've used in your book for it is you've called it quote, a journey
[Amit Varma]: out of middle class frugality to Toblerone heaven.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, a tangential sort of thought strikes me here that you know, being you know, someone
[Amit Varma]: who sort of grew up at the same time and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I just felt this wave of nostalgia when you just use the word cassettes, because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it was such a big deal for us in those days to discover new music to somehow
[Amit Varma]: plan and scrape together a mixtape of the stuff you like, and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, like you point out that, you know, it's almost difficult today to imagine
[Amit Varma]: a world without the internet as difficult as it would have been for us to imagine a
[Unknown]: world without electricity, maybe.
[Amit Varma]: And it kind of strikes me, therefore, that, like, do you think that the whole experience
[Amit Varma]: of growing up and discovering yourself is then becomes very different?
[Amit Varma]: Because like you pointed out, like, you know, you mentioned that you went on long walks
[Amit Varma]: with your grandfather.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd imagine that if you're growing up today, you're not going on so many long walks
[Amit Varma]: with your grandfather, you because you're bombarded all the times by, you know, so much
[Amit Varma]: for your senses by so much information, there is so much to discover.
[Amit Varma]: And on the one hand, of course, kids growing up today are just the luckiest generation
[Amit Varma]: ever, because they have all this at their fingertips.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, is there something you think lost in the fact that they don't have that
[Amit Varma]: time and that space to sort of be with themselves and so on?
[Guest]: I think so, for sure.
[Guest]: And now, you know, I'm sounding like an uncle already.
[Guest]: So everyone who's listening to this will say, sit down, uncle or shut up, uncle or something.
[Guest]: But I think I think there is something different from not being connected, right?
[Guest]: So even now, I mean, you know, I go for walks with my partner, who happens to be younger
[Guest]: than me, you know, different generation, and it's hard to walk for 10 minutes without him
[Guest]: whipping out his phone and taking a picture for a future Instagram story.
[Guest]: So and then he's like, you know, we have to think of the story also, I'm like, okay.
[Guest]: So I think that is fundamentally different.
[Guest]: But even with us, right, I mean, one is so attached to the gadget right now, one is so
[Guest]: attached to the screen right now.
[Guest]: So it's not just younger people.
[Guest]: I think we've also fundamentally in some way, culturally and, you know, physically, in terms
[Guest]: of how we experience things change.
[Guest]: But it has pros and cons, right?
[Guest]: I mean, the pros is you have a lot of time, etc.
[Guest]: The cons is when you're growing up in an economy, which is frugal, in a world where information
[Guest]: is limited, it takes you a long time.
[Guest]: So you know, my generation, our generation of people come out a lot later, people spend
[Guest]: years and in my case, I didn't struggle with self acceptance, right?
[Guest]: It was, I was comfortable.
[Guest]: So many people in our generation, torture themselves, you know, about whether what they
[Guest]: are feeling or who they are, is normal or not.
[Guest]: So many destroy their own lives and the lives of others by conforming either to the pressures
[Guest]: of an arranged heterosexual marriage, and so many other things, right?
[Guest]: So I think for today's, I mean, you know, for younger people, for today's generation,
[Guest]: I'm just so glad that there is an ecosystem built for those who can access it, so that
[Guest]: they can learn, they can, you know, understand themselves, they can, you know, express themselves,
[Guest]: and they can imagine a better future for themselves in whichever they wish, right?
[Guest]: So I don't want to be too nostalgic and romanticize and say everything was good.
[Guest]: I mean, in those days, of course, you know, it was our childhood, so it was good.
[Guest]: But young people today have so much more access to, you know, to knowledge and opportunities.
[Guest]: And that's excellent as well.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and it struck me as kind of poignant and charming, but poignant also, that you
[Amit Varma]: speak about how, you know, you watch Kayamat Se Kayamat Tak and then you made a fantasy
[Amit Varma]: out of it and called it Gayamat Se Gayamat Tak where, you know, Aamir is romancing you
[Amit Varma]: instead of Juhi Chawla, which is charming, but it's also poignant because it sort of
[Amit Varma]: indicates what you were just speaking about, that the search for role models is so futile
[Amit Varma]: that you have to eventually find it in your own fantasies.
[Guest]: Yeah, we didn't have Made in Heaven, right, where you see a gay couple, or four more shards
[Guest]: where you can see a lesbian wedding or whatever, right?
[Guest]: So we had to interpolate ourselves into these stories.
[Guest]: And imagine that Sholay is a gay bromance, and of course, Jai and Veeru are gay.
[Guest]: You know, that's true, but because, you know, we didn't have My Brother Nikhil or Aligarh
[Guest]: or Ik Lerki or Shubh Mangal where, you know, it's very clear in the first 10 minutes that
[Guest]: they're gay, there's a gay kiss, and you know, then the story goes on.
[Guest]: So yeah, we had to, we had to fantasize, we had to imagine, we had to...
[Amit Varma]: And you know, another thing that's kind of struck me in many different contexts is that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, being born a straight person in a heteronormative society as I am, my identity
[Amit Varma]: doesn't really play a big part in my life, I can take it for granted, I don't have to
[Amit Varma]: think about it.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas if you're a woman, or if you're gay, or if you're any number of things, if, you
[Amit Varma]: know, if you're Dalit, that identity is like an extra layer that you always have to be
[Amit Varma]: aware of, and you carry it with you.
[Amit Varma]: And it kind of factors into everything you do.
[Amit Varma]: You know, was that sense of that extra layer strong in you?
[Amit Varma]: Was there a sense of frustration at kind of, you know, having to navigate the world with
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, that extra layer of awareness attached to it, which, you know, most people
[Guest]: around you would not have to bother with?
[Guest]: So Amit, here, I would like to, I would like to disagree.
[Guest]: And I would like to say that I don't think that as a straight person, your identity does
[Guest]: not play a role, or that you are not conscious about it.
[Guest]: In fact, a lot of good academic research now is coming up about straightness, or whiteness,
[Guest]: or, you know, all these things, which are the majority that you assume, need not think
[Guest]: about themselves, need not have issues, need not be conscious, need not articulate themselves.
[Guest]: So straight people also articulate their straightness in different and unique ways.
[Guest]: And a lot of, in fact, I've been really toying with this idea of doing another book called
[Guest]: Straightistan, where I understand straight people, and immerse myself in their world
[Guest]: and just see what it's like.
[Guest]: What does it mean being straight?
[Guest]: How were you like when you were nine years old, growing up straight in India?
[Guest]: So I think a lot of us, you know, we, I think we're all conscious of the various facets
[Guest]: of our identity.
[Guest]: But certainly, and you live in a heteronormative, patriarchal, and in India, you know, a casteist
[Guest]: society which is oriented towards certain things, when you happen to be the majority,
[Guest]: it's a luxury to imagine that you don't have to think about certain things, right?
[Guest]: So as you said, you know, when you feel you're not the majority, these things, you become
[Guest]: slightly more conscious of it.
[Guest]: So that's the thing.
[Guest]: But I don't think I mean, you know, I think if you're upper caste, you are conscious or
[Guest]: you are aware, and your identity really frames everything that you do, in the confidence
[Guest]: you have and how you physically navigate through space, how you fill up a space, how you, you
[Guest]: know, have, just imagine that you have access to things, and so on, in a way that someone
[Guest]: who's not upper caste might not, same way with men, right?
[Guest]: And that's what's so interesting.
[Guest]: In fact, another TED fellow, Jasmeen Patheja, you know, from that same 2009 conference has
[Guest]: done these incredible experiments with blank noise, where she and, you know, fellow artist
[Guest]: activists go to public spaces, and just see what it does to men, when they occupy those
[Guest]: spaces in a way that men do, you know.
[Guest]: So for example, 10 women sit on a parapet, put one leg up on a wall, spread themselves,
[Guest]: because men tend to spread themselves.
[Guest]: And when men pass by these women, look at them and do, you know, or whatever, you know,
[Guest]: make noises, or go and lie down in a park and occupy that space in that sense, right?
[Guest]: In a way that, and then they record reactions of men, because men have never seen women,
[Guest]: in that sense, be comfortable together in a public park or lying down, or, you know,
[Guest]: it's very strange for men to walk by and have a group of women, maybe call them out.
[Guest]: But it seems very normal for the opposite to happen, in that sense, right?
[Guest]: So I think, you know, when you're not in this, in the majority, then you are conscious of
[Guest]: that difference, for sure.
[Guest]: If you're a woman in India, you're conscious, if you're, you know, if you're Dalit, if you're
[Guest]: queer, if you're Muslim, you would be conscious of how you navigate, you know, the spaces,
[Guest]: but also how you think of yourself, how you imagine, you know, a future for yourself,
[Guest]: how you negotiate, you know, various aspects of yourself.
[Guest]: So yeah, so certainly for me, my, while my queerness is not the only part of me that
[Guest]: I talk about, I mean, you know, I'm also Sindhi, and, you know, and that comes out in so many
[Guest]: ways.
[Guest]: I love bling, of course, and so many other things.
[Guest]: I mean, there's so many aspects of my identity.
[Guest]: But you know, but certainly in it's tough, these are aspects that I am conscious that
[Guest]: I would be slightly a little more conscious about.
[Guest]: But by that, I'm not saying that, you know, you are also conscious of your straightness
[Amit Varma]: and the way you express it in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, I don't dispute that.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, in the world we live in, straightness is itself an enormous privilege of a sort.
[Amit Varma]: What I kind of meant was that, you know, let's say, for example, just to take the male female
[Amit Varma]: context, if I want to go out for a walk at 11pm, I don't have to think twice.
[Amit Varma]: If I get into say, if I get into an elevator with five strangers, I don't have to be on
[Amit Varma]: high alert and I don't have to have that extra layer of alertness, which women will naturally
[Amit Varma]: have just because of the world that we unfortunately, kind of live in.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, I sort of, by your point there, my other question is like you pointed out
[Amit Varma]: and you know, one of the things that, you know, through the book, you've spoken of how
[Amit Varma]: all of us have many selves, and therefore can't just be sort of, you know, and that
[Amit Varma]: is a danger to be defined by one particular kind of identity.
[Amit Varma]: And it struck me there that, you know, being gay in a heteronormative society where there
[Amit Varma]: is so much discrimination and prejudice and all of that, then it is such a big deal.
[Amit Varma]: How much then does that part of your identity sort of shape and define your life like supposing
[Amit Varma]: we lived in an entirely just society, where none of this existed, where it was completely
[Amit Varma]: where it was as normal to be gay as to be straight, as normal in the sense in the way
[Amit Varma]: of how society treats you and all that, you know, what direction would your life then
[Amit Varma]: have taken?
[Amit Varma]: It's kind of moved in this direction, because, you know, you've been kind of driven by this
[Amit Varma]: great cause at some level, maybe it begins with self discovery, and then it goes on to
[Amit Varma]: trying to make the world a better place.
[Amit Varma]: But what if the world did not need to be made better in this way?
[Amit Varma]: What would you be doing today?
[Amit Varma]: Who would, you know, Parmeshani have been?
[Amit Varma]: Would you still be in management at a top company?
[Amit Varma]: Would there be any reason to be there?
[Amit Varma]: Would you be maybe an artist or something?
[Guest]: What would you be?
[Guest]: I can still be all those other things too.
[Guest]: No, I think in my case, I've been, I've been really blessed.
[Guest]: And I talked about these multiple privileges in the book as well as something that really,
[Guest]: really pushed me to create, you know, more fairer ecosystems for everyone.
[Guest]: But I've been blessed in the sense that I've had, you know, while I didn't grow up in wealth,
[Guest]: I've had like very supportive parents, you know, who could give me an education, you
[Guest]: know, at least in India until, you know, until college level.
[Guest]: And then, you know, when I went to the US, I, I got it on scholarship, but to have that
[Guest]: support, even in terms of sexuality, when I came out, it was easier with my mom and
[Guest]: dad took some more time, but there was never a rejection.
[Guest]: And there was never that drama of like, you know, you become straight otherwise, or like
[Guest]: a lot of queer people go through real hell, there's no other word for it, they go through
[Guest]: torture by their own parents and families, whether it is things like conversion therapy,
[Guest]: which is sickening, that it's still happening, whether it is forced heterosexual marriage,
[Guest]: all the way up to people to people's own families, torturing their own children, killing them,
[Guest]: all of that, right.
[Guest]: So all that happens in our country, not just if you're queer, but if you're different in
[Guest]: any way.
[Guest]: So given that range of horrible things that might have happened, I think, you know, to
[Guest]: have, you know, parents who love and understand you is the biggest blessing and the biggest
[Guest]: privilege, which is why a lot of my book, Queeristan, is about this, about this parental
[Guest]: gaze and this parental framework is something that is so vital.
[Guest]: I've had schools and colleges, which have, you know, been in different levels supportive.
[Guest]: I've been blessed with workplaces of, you know, different kinds, which have, even if
[Guest]: they've not been supportive, they've not been overtly discriminatory.
[Guest]: And these are all blessings and, you know, whether it's having academic, you know, the
[Guest]: fortune of going to a place like MIT or like, you know, doing classes at places like Yale
[Guest]: and all of that, which is like, opened my mind up to not just possibilities, but also
[Guest]: networks of like, just amazing, inspiring people.
[Guest]: Some of whom I write about in the book, right?
[Guest]: People like Ahmed Katrada, who unfortunately is no more, who shared, who was in the next
[Guest]: cell of Nelson Mandela on Robben Island, and who spoke to me about hope and forgiveness
[Guest]: and resilience.
[Guest]: So, so many people, right?
[Guest]: Assam Dawood, who's doing incredible work on refugees in Israel and Palestine.
[Guest]: And there's so many incredible people whom I've met through this, you know, through my
[Guest]: education journeys.
[Guest]: So I think I would have been doing exactly this because, you know, I don't think I would
[Guest]: have been doing anything different had we been living in a, you know, in a more heteronormative,
[Guest]: I think I would have been working on the different things that interest me.
[Guest]: I would have been trying to connect them together.
[Guest]: And in a way, this is where I'm going to even now, because, you know, one of my realizations
[Guest]: over the past 10 years and in between the two books has been very much about intersectionality.
[Guest]: This is something that I've learned completely from the young people that I've been lucky
[Guest]: enough to hang out with and learn my own team members.
[Guest]: So many of the people that you encounter in the book, whether it's Professor Dhiren Borissa
[Guest]: from OP Jindal, whether it's Grace Banu, who's an incredible trans rights activist from Tuticorin
[Guest]: in Tamil Nadu, whether it's Rafiul, who runs the Queer Muslim Project, whether it's Aro,
[Guest]: who along with an incredible team run Dalit Queer Project, and people whom I haven't met,
[Guest]: whether it's Greta Thurberg or others, right, all around the world are trying to create
[Guest]: a better world in terms of environment, gender, and so on.
[Guest]: Even my own learning over the past 10 years has been that if you care about queer rights
[Guest]: and queer inclusion, like I do, you really have to contextualize these in the context
[Guest]: of other movements for social change and social justice.
[Guest]: And you really need to, in a sense, build bridges of solidarity with others, because
[Guest]: we can't say that you want a more better world for queer people only, and not recognize that
[Guest]: the struggle is linked to the anti-caste movement, or the movement for a better, cleaner environment,
[Guest]: or Black Lives Matter in the US or other parts of the world, and so many other social justice
[Guest]: movements which are happening all over the world, all powered by young people.
[Guest]: So my thinking also has grown because of the people I've encountered and met into realizing
[Guest]: the intersectional nature of the struggle, that's one.
[Guest]: And the other is in realizing that the interconnected nature of what the solution might be.
[Guest]: So a lot of Queeristan, the book itself, talks about the fact that we live in a world where
[Guest]: companies, NGOs, different governments, national, state, municipal, will have to come together
[Guest]: in different ways, in different formations to solve some of these issues.
[Guest]: Because the challenges are not something that any one of these stakeholders will be able
[Guest]: to do by themselves, right?
[Guest]: So I mean, this is where my mind is moving towards more and more.
[Guest]: How do we create, they needn't be tight networks of collaboration, they could be loose for
[Guest]: certain projects or things, as we saw post-COVID, for example, we saw companies come forward
[Guest]: and give money and resources, we saw incredible NGOs come together and organize relief, we
[Guest]: saw state governments that got into action and helped and empowered, things like that,
[Guest]: which is why, I mean, some of the stuff could happen.
[Guest]: So I think a lot of the future is going to be about this.
[Guest]: And my thinking is that, you know, I would have anyway been on this track, even otherwise.
[Guest]: Now I'm more and more on just thinking about what would it mean to build these other kinds
[Guest]: of connections, these other kinds of solidarities, and move ahead.
[Guest]: And I've completely rambled, but yours is a long form podcast.
[Guest]: So that's wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, rambling here is a feature, not a bug, that's what the listeners kind
[Amit Varma]: of appreciate.
[Amit Varma]: But there's sort of, you know, some fascinating strands in what you just said.
[Amit Varma]: And one, of course, is, you know, you mentioned Amit Katrada, who was, you know, Mandela's
[Amit Varma]: cell mate, and you recount this fascinating bit in your book, where he was showing you
[Amit Varma]: around the cell block where the two of them were housed.
[Amit Varma]: And the part that really jumped out at me over there is about how he was talking about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it took us 10 years of agitation to be allowed to read newspapers, and 15 years
[Amit Varma]: of agitation to sort of be allowed pen and paper or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, those were the kind of timespans that you're talking about, where you just
[Amit Varma]: keep trying, you don't know if it will happen in your own lifetime, and you make incremental
[Amit Varma]: progress at 10 year and five year chunks.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas, you know, in these modern times, perhaps, that's vastly accelerated by, you
[Amit Varma]: know, social media and globalization, would you say that's the case?
[Amit Varma]: Like I'm, there's one passage in your book also that kind of struck me, which is about
[Amit Varma]: the impact of liberalization on the gay movement, where at one point, you write, I'll quote
[Amit Varma]: your words, quote, consider the designer Janjum Gadi, who hails from Tirbin, a remote village
[Amit Varma]: in Arunachal Pradesh, electricity came to his village only in the late 1990s.
[Amit Varma]: He stumbled upon fashion while going through old issues of femina, imagine the journey
[Amit Varma]: of transportation from the northeast to Delhi, possibly because of new post liberalization
[Amit Varma]: air routes of education at Wigan and Lake College possible because of post 1990s needed
[Amit Varma]: new kinds of colleges of internship with Rohit Bal, the legend who attended Janjum's graduation
[Amit Varma]: at which he won Best Designer of his debut Fashion Week presentation, possible because
[Amit Varma]: there was now a network of such biannual shows offering visibility to young talent and of
[Amit Varma]: sales.
[Amit Varma]: Again, this post liberalization India had created a new customer base, eager to consume
[Amit Varma]: fashion, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this is, again, sort of tangential, but it strikes me that in a lot of activism, especially
[Amit Varma]: left wing activism, you know, free markets and capitalism are often given such a bad
[Amit Varma]: name.
[Amit Varma]: Well, the way I kind of look at markets is that markets are the way by which a society
[Amit Varma]: fulfills its own needs, you know, voluntary actions in about so to say, and this is also
[Amit Varma]: something that you seem to have embraced, because rather than sort of work in a dusty NGO and
[Amit Varma]: work in villages in the bylanes of towns, one of the things that you do is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: work within a company and work with corporates to actually make things better on the ground.
[Amit Varma]: So in this one aspect, you seem to have a more optimistic view than, you know, many
[Amit Varma]: other activists would, is this something that you've thought about?
[Amit Varma]: Or is this something that you, you know, that you evolved towards?
[Amit Varma]: Or did you always sort of disagree with the demonization of markets and evil capitalists
[Amit Varma]: and so on?
[Guest]: No, I don't disagree with the demonization of markets and evil capitalism, there is a
[Guest]: lot of merit in the criticism of capitalism.
[Guest]: And we are seeing, we have seen it in the past few years, right, Piketty has written
[Guest]: about this, as have so many others, whether it's, you know, Amartya Sen, John Reyes in
[Guest]: India, and so many others, about, you know, how inequality and even, you know, Abhijit
[Guest]: and Esther, right, you know, who work so much on poverty, right.
[Guest]: So clearly, our world is becoming more and more unequal.
[Guest]: And you know, one of the perils of capitalism is that it has been widening inequalities,
[Guest]: and that has been terrible.
[Guest]: Capitalism has been is good in so many ways, right.
[Guest]: In that passage that you read out, it shows you the liberating, you know, both in an imaginative
[Guest]: and in a really, in an economic sense, power of capitalism, say, for young Janjum, and
[Guest]: the leap that Janjum has been able to make.
[Guest]: But in so many other cases, and you know, that's, I mean, that's been that's great.
[Guest]: But in so many other cases, certainly, I mean, you know, capitalism has led to a widening
[Guest]: of inequalities.
[Guest]: And so I think it's really time to reimagine capitalism, really look at this inequality,
[Guest]: and figure out how to, you know, stem it, stop it, reduce it, cannot continue like this
[Guest]: forever.
[Amit Varma]: Can I interject and sort of make a larger point about economic inequality, which I keep
[Amit Varma]: making is that I think people who worry about economic inequality commit what I call the
[Amit Varma]: zero sum fallacy, where they assume that there is a fixed amount of money in the world.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, inequality is bad, because of the rich get richer, the poor get poorer,
[Amit Varma]: obviously, in a zero sum world, more inequality would mean more poverty.
[Amit Varma]: But what happens in developing countries, and what has certainly happened in India over
[Amit Varma]: the last, you know, 30 years, is that inequality has grown as poverty has declined, because
[Amit Varma]: we're not in a zero sum world, every voluntary transaction is both people better off.
[Amit Varma]: So what you've, you know, the post liberalization estimates say there have been some 300 million
[Amit Varma]: people come out of poverty, which to me is a moral triumph, because poverty is to me
[Amit Varma]: India's biggest problem.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, the solutions for poverty and inequality are very different, you could solve
[Amit Varma]: inequality in a flash by making everybody equally poor.
[Amit Varma]: And I kind of go by what Harry Frankfurt calls the doctrine of sufficiency, Harry Frankfurt
[Amit Varma]: is a philosopher who's written this great book called on inequality, and he's also written
[Amit Varma]: a fabulous book called on bullshit, which kind of describes a lot of what comes out
[Amit Varma]: of Trump and Modi these days.
[Amit Varma]: But the phrase that he coins is a doctrine of sufficiency, where he says that what is
[Amit Varma]: important is to go by, you know, how absolute levels of poverty are that the doctrine of
[Amit Varma]: sufficiency essentially states and I'm obviously paraphrasing here, because it's from memory,
[Amit Varma]: that everyone should have enough to kind of whatever suffices to live a good life at least.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, India, you know, I think a lot of our dialogue about inequality doesn't
[Amit Varma]: take this into account, it assumes that there is a zero sum world.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is that, as poverty declines, inequality will go up.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, in India, vice versa.
[Amit Varma]: But the larger issue of the zero sum fallacy, and I'm just thinking aloud here, it seems
[Amit Varma]: to me can also, you know, crop up in certain kinds of activism, where, you know, the way
[Amit Varma]: I see it is that I would love all individuals to be empowered and have the same kind of
[Amit Varma]: opportunities and we can all grow together.
[Amit Varma]: And yet there is a sense in some kinds of dialogue and some kinds of discourse that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, people with x identity are enemies of people with y identity.
[Amit Varma]: And it almost has a feel of a zero sum game that, you know, x oppressed us for centuries
[Amit Varma]: or x broke our temple and made a mosque or whatever, it can come from either the right
[Amit Varma]: or the left.
[Amit Varma]: And, and therefore, as why we must stand up and take revenge, which again, sort of to
[Amit Varma]: me, seems to be stuck in that kind of mindset, it's not really leading to a question.
[Amit Varma]: But since you kind of brought it up, I thought it's, I'll just kind of state this counter
[Guest]: view.
[Guest]: I agree completely with you that zero sum games are, you know, are limiting, which is
[Guest]: right, this, you know, the book is very much about win-win scenarios.
[Guest]: And across everyone, which is also why the book has a range of individuals across the
[Guest]: spectrum in it.
[Guest]: It's an inclusive book in the sense that it has people who might be right leaning, it
[Guest]: has people who might be left leaning, it has people who are centrist.
[Guest]: And to get back to your question earlier about a tension, say, between activism and capitalism
[Guest]: in that sense, I actually think, I don't think of it as oppositional.
[Guest]: I think a lot of the work that we are doing, and we need to acknowledge it, a lot of the
[Guest]: work that we are doing in the corporate world, for example, is built on years and years of
[Guest]: labor of our activist friends.
[Guest]: And I think it's vital to acknowledge the fact that all this work is being built upon
[Guest]: it, and it continues to be built upon it, right?
[Guest]: So whether it is NGOs who have struggled for years, whether it is activists who came out
[Guest]: from the 70s onwards, and paved the way for, you know, this generation to do the kind of
[Guest]: work that it's doing, whether it's the lawyers who fought everyone, you know, there are so
[Guest]: many cases from the 90s onwards.
[Guest]: And you know, people remember the 2018 victory.
[Guest]: But you know, there were lawyers who were involved in 2013, 2009, even before that,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: All those struggles.
[Guest]: So I actually think, I don't think of it as oppositional at all.
[Guest]: I think, you know, I think of it as a universe in which we all are doing whatever we can,
[Guest]: wherever, wherever we can.
[Guest]: So I situated myself in the corporate world, because I could, because I also felt that
[Guest]: there was a need for someone like me, who is able to, in a sense, shape, shift and translate.
[Guest]: And I felt that my work would be more useful from a corporate world.
[Guest]: Because even with the toehold that I have, like, I don't have power in the corporate
[Guest]: world, honestly, I have influence, right?
[Guest]: But I have a toehold of influence.
[Guest]: So how can I use that position to put that toe in, kind of Biden, open a door, you know,
[Guest]: first at Godrej.
[Guest]: And then, you know, hopefully in other companies, and say, let's talk about this.
[Guest]: Let's do this.
[Guest]: Let's do this, right?
[Guest]: There's no way that I could be, that I would be successful at doing all of the work that
[Guest]: I've been doing, actually, if it was not for my activist friends on the ground, who are
[Guest]: actually doing the real heavy lifting.
[Guest]: If it was not for my academic friends in universities, who are questioning, who are pushing, who
[Guest]: are countering, who are reflecting.
[Guest]: So I think we have to stop thinking of these spaces as oppositional, and instead think
[Guest]: of them as nodes.
[Guest]: What we should also stop thinking of them as silos, silos, from which we cannot share,
[Guest]: connect, interact, disagree with each other, but hopefully, ultimately be productive in
[Guest]: the kind of world building that we want to engage in.
[Guest]: And I learned this from Sir Ian McKellen, who when he visited Bombay some years ago,
[Guest]: younger viewers of this podcast might know him as Gandalf and Magneto.
[Guest]: For the older listeners, it would be the famous Shakespearean actor, Sir Ian McKellen.
[Guest]: And you know, Ian is Ian for me, Sir Ian for all of y'all, because he's my friend.
[Guest]: Yeah, Magneto is my friend, all of y'all must be so jealous.
[Guest]: This is why you're so magnetic.
[Guest]: Yes, it rubbed off.
[Guest]: And he said that, right.
[Guest]: So Ian is also, he started Stonewall, which is this incredible queer rights NGO based
[Guest]: out of the UK.
[Guest]: And he actually told me, he said, Look, Parmesh, I've been doing this for years.
[Guest]: And we all I mean, my realization is that we are all needed, right?
[Guest]: We need our activist friends on the streets to push for change.
[Guest]: We need people in academia to imagine new worlds, and to teach generations of people
[Guest]: about these new worlds.
[Guest]: But we need people like you and me, who can, you know, maybe wear a business suit, go to
[Guest]: the businesses, go to the politicians, talk to them and say, Look, there's a new world
[Guest]: coming.
[Guest]: How do we work together?
[Guest]: And he said, we all need to do our role.
[Guest]: And to imagine that, you know, just one of us is going to bring about change would be
[Guest]: whatever, change comes with the whole system.
[Guest]: Now, my point in this whole book is to recognize that there's an ecosystem.
[Guest]: And to recognize that, you know, there are multiple spaces where change is happening,
[Guest]: but also to help correct some of those things, right?
[Guest]: I think even within the queer movement, right, there is a genuine dissatisfaction that, you
[Guest]: know, gay men tend to do a lot of the talking and tend to get a lot of the credit, right.
[Guest]: So I've written this book being very conscious that I'm a gay person, that I'm a gay man
[Guest]: myself, right?
[Guest]: How does one use these projects to create platforms and amplify other voices, which
[Guest]: are, you know, within the movements, which have been, you know, fundamental in helping
[Guest]: shape the movement, but because of structure, or so many other things not been heard, right?
[Guest]: So how do we foreground or create platforms to forefront trans voices, lesbian voices,
[Guest]: Dalit voices, you know, so many of these other things is also something that I've been, you
[Guest]: know, very, very conscious of in this process.
[Amit Varma]: One of the sort of things that I found profoundly impressive about the work that you've done
[Amit Varma]: and Sir Ian has done, I can't call him Ian, that Sir Ian has done and almost all the people
[Amit Varma]: whose stories you've related in your book have done comes from sort of a common, you
[Amit Varma]: know, bypasses a common complaint that I often have about how liberals in India have approached,
[Amit Varma]: you know, their idea of India, where, you know, one of the themes, which is almost a
[Amit Varma]: cliche on this podcast, which I'll often ask guests when I'm talking about political philosophy
[Amit Varma]: and so on, is what we seem to have done in 1950 is a bunch of liberal elites imposed
[Amit Varma]: relatively liberal constitution, not as liberal as I'd like, but a relatively liberal constitution
[Amit Varma]: on an illiberal society.
[Amit Varma]: And but we couldn't see those ideas within society itself.
[Amit Varma]: And what has happened today is that if you look at our politics, you know, our politics
[Amit Varma]: has caught up with our culture, you know, Andrew Breitbart once said that politics is
[Amit Varma]: downstream of culture.
[Amit Varma]: So it kind of strikes me that if you want to affect true change is difficult to do it
[Amit Varma]: from the top down.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it simply will not work, it has to go the other way.
[Amit Varma]: And that's much harder, you know, it's much easier to, you know, try to get the state
[Amit Varma]: to do things in a top down way, it's far harder to get into the culture, because then it takes
[Amit Varma]: years, if not decades for these ideas to sort of percolate through because you want the
[Amit Varma]: culture to change, you want, you know, LGBTQ people to be accepted, not because there is
[Amit Varma]: a law which says you shall not discriminate, but because people accept it from their hearts.
[Amit Varma]: And I think, you know, one of the things that does make me hopeful, despite the way our
[Amit Varma]: politics is going, is that, you know, to paraphrase Martin Luther King, the arc of history seems
[Amit Varma]: to be bending towards inclusion, in the sense that, you know, I remember when in 2018, when
[Amit Varma]: the judgment happened, where 377 was outlawed once again.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought to myself that if this had happened in 1988, there would be so many voices raised
[Amit Varma]: against it.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I can't recall, you know, apart from people on the fringes, anybody really
[Amit Varma]: against that sort of wonderful judgment in 2018.
[Amit Varma]: So on the one hand, it seems to me that, you know, for a variety of reasons, maybe openness
[Amit Varma]: to global influences and social media and all that, you know, society has changed and
[Amit Varma]: become more tolerant and all of that, at least in these specific contexts.
[Amit Varma]: But the other sort of interesting aspect that I really liked and admired is that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what you're trying to do in your case, in the context of corporates, but also other
[Amit Varma]: contexts like you do with the Goodrich Culture Lab, is bring this bottom up change in the
[Amit Varma]: culture.
[Amit Varma]: Is this something that you've kind of thought about, you know, was there a conscious understanding
[Amit Varma]: that this is how we need to do it?
[Amit Varma]: Or did things just happen along the way?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I try and do both.
[Guest]: And, you know, I don't know how much of say the work through the lab is bottoms up, because,
[Guest]: you know, there's so much we're just one of the multiple spaces in, you know, Mumbai and
[Guest]: then the country, which hosts and different kinds of conversations.
[Guest]: It's certainly an attempt to platform and amplify a range of voices, which are all talking
[Guest]: about contemporary India.
[Guest]: And over the years, I think we've, you know, based on different themes, I think we've been
[Guest]: able to showcase, you know, incredible individuals, through a range of different formats as well,
[Guest]: physical, mostly physical events, but now shifting to online.
[Guest]: So yeah, that's been very, very good.
[Guest]: But I also think that it is a combination.
[Guest]: Again, it's not, because I think, at least in the corporate world, I'm very impatient,
[Guest]: and I can't wait for bottoms up change to happen.
[Guest]: So I strongly recommend in the corporate world, and given how, you know, hierarchical Indian
[Guest]: society is in terms of, you know, where the government, where the corporations, etc, I
[Guest]: actually say, if you can influence people at the top, and if until the culture, I mean,
[Guest]: I'm not saying we shouldn't focus on the cultural change, and, you know, help change societal
[Guest]: attitudes, values, etc, towards.
[Guest]: But as you rightly said, that's a long term project, until then, it would really help
[Guest]: if we had the chairperson, the chief minister, etc, say, look, this matters.
[Guest]: I want to do this.
[Guest]: Here's how we're going to do it.
[Guest]: I want to report in like, you know, one year or whatever.
[Guest]: I mean, India also really works like that.
[Guest]: And one of the reasons that say, Godrej has been made maybe more successful in this, in
[Guest]: the small journey that we've taken so far than the other companies is at Godrej.
[Guest]: It was Nisa Godrej from the Godrej family chairperson saying inclusion matters to us.
[Guest]: Here is what we're going to do.
[Guest]: I want to create a Godrej which is more inclusive, make it happen.
[Guest]: So everyone across the group, right, would read this message and say, okay, you know,
[Guest]: the chairperson from the family, this is what, you know, let's think about this, right?
[Guest]: In so many other companies, it might be someone really well-meaning from HR, driving it through
[Guest]: diversity and inclusion.
[Guest]: It might not have the same impact.
[Guest]: So I think we have to do in, you know, which is why in states, right, and we talk about
[Guest]: some of the progressive states in India, right, in Kerala, in Chhattisgarh, the chief ministers
[Guest]: have gone on record to say that, you know, they care about LGBT inclusion, they've given
[Guest]: scholarships to trans people, they have supported so many events and so on.
[Guest]: The bureaucracy will change, you know, when that clear direction comes, right?
[Guest]: And then that change percolates as well.
[Guest]: So I actually think it's a combination of both.
[Guest]: I think for immediate effect, it's actually more timely and like it just, you know, it's
[Guest]: just more clever to work with a top-down approach.
[Guest]: But certainly the long-term project has to be, you know, a long drawn attempt at cultural,
[Guest]: at socio-cultural change through various things, through education, through movies, through
[Guest]: role modeling and, you know, so on.
[Guest]: That takes time.
[Guest]: And you know, as I write in the book, I don't have, I mean, I don't want to wait.
[Guest]: I don't want to wait.
[Guest]: I mean, we waited for seven decades after independence.
[Guest]: My queer brothers and sisters have waited for seven decades to be decriminalized.
[Guest]: And having said that as well, there's no equality as such, right?
[Guest]: Because we may have had this 2018 verdict, but we've also had at the same time, and you
[Guest]: know, people tend to forget that we had a 2014 NALSA judgment, which was visionary in
[Guest]: terms of the scope of rights it offered our trans citizens of this country, which has
[Guest]: led to actually a not so sensitive Trans Act, which has recently been followed, right?
[Guest]: So there's so much we need to change the Trans Act, you know, hopefully soon, so that the
[Guest]: spirit of the NALSA judgment can actually be, can live in the Trans Act, you know, on
[Guest]: multiple fronts.
[Guest]: We need to convert the non-criminality, which is what section 377 going away has offered
[Guest]: us into real equality on multiple fronts, which is comprehensive anti-discrimination
[Guest]: laws in our country, which we don't have other kinds of equality laws.
[Guest]: I write in the book about how, you know, at least for me personally, I would love to be
[Guest]: married to my partner, I would love to frame my marriage certificate on the wall, and do
[Guest]: all those kind of maybe it's very silly.
[Guest]: So many of my friends critique me, they say, you know, you're doing heteronormative mimicry.
[Guest]: But you know, I want the right to do that if I choose, I mean, it's not heteronormative
[Guest]: mimicry.
[Guest]: For me, it's Karan Johar and Yash Chopra obsessed, Bollywood obsessed mimicry.
[Guest]: Growing up in the 80s and 90s, what to do?
[Guest]: I blame Shah Rukh for all my romantic constructs.
[Guest]: But why shouldn't we have, I mean, why shouldn't I have the rights to be as silly and stupid
[Guest]: as everyone else if you know, in doing all of these things, right?
[Guest]: So I think we have a lot of work to do.
[Guest]: And in that work, I mean, I think a top down approach, I would like both.
[Guest]: I would like people in positions of power saying this matters, and let's do it as well
[Guest]: as cultural change.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I buy that, you know, both together can be helpful.
[Amit Varma]: And it's not either or.
[Amit Varma]: But I was actually interpreting the work that you do with corporate leaders, like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Nisa Godrej doing the things that she does, as, in a sense, bottom up, because it's not
[Amit Varma]: imposed by the state saying do this, it is voluntary action.
[Amit Varma]: It's someone who runs a company herself saying that, you know, this is a sort of culture
[Amit Varma]: I would like in my company, and this is what I'll do for it.
[Amit Varma]: So in that sense, you know, because it's voluntary action and not imposed by the state, I was
[Amit Varma]: referring to that as bottom up, I can see how in through another prism, it can seem
[Amit Varma]: as top down and in the context of what is happening within the company.
[Amit Varma]: And my next question kind of comes there, that, you know, as you've sort of detailed
[Amit Varma]: through your book, it's, you know, you've done pioneering work with Godrej and you know,
[Amit Varma]: various other companies have also kind of been doing great work from, you know, IBM
[Amit Varma]: to Cummins to, you know, various other people.
[Amit Varma]: Now, the question is that there was also that sort of disturbing example of that person
[Amit Varma]: in charge of diversity and inclusion at Tech Mahindra, who was, you know, bigoted towards
[Amit Varma]: a gay employee.
[Amit Varma]: And when that came out, of course, when it became a big thing on Twitter, she was fired
[Amit Varma]: and an inquiry was done and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And as you point out, the people who actually, you know, Anand Mahindra, who actually runs
[Amit Varma]: a company is extremely enlightened that way, but that doesn't necessarily seep through
[Amit Varma]: the culture.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a question that you've sort of raised yourself at that point where you talk
[Amit Varma]: about this incident, that, you know, it's okay to have enlightened people at the top
[Amit Varma]: make these rules and make these whatever, but it's also, you know, you know, that doesn't
[Amit Varma]: necessarily mean that the culture down below changes and the homophobia goes away.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas I would imagine if you're working in a company and you have rules that forbid
[Amit Varma]: you from doing certain things, you will have to follow those rules, and you'll internalize
[Amit Varma]: them and the culture will change a bit.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, you're bringing in these sort of normalized attitude towards, you know,
[Amit Varma]: certain kinds of people and those are not going to disappear, those will manifest in
[Amit Varma]: other ways.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I know your thoughts on this are still evolving as you raise it as a question
[Amit Varma]: in the book.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, can you tell me a little bit more about how you've thought on this?
[Amit Varma]: Have there been moments where you felt despair and said that, you know, even if, you know,
[Amit Varma]: we do all this work, people are what they are?
[Amit Varma]: Or are you generally hopeful?
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, your book is full of such stories of hope and such stories of inclusion.
[Guest]: What's your sort of overall take on this?
[Guest]: No, no, I feel despair every day.
[Guest]: Every day I fluctuate between hope and despair, hope and despair all the time.
[Guest]: If I end on hope, 51% of the time and despair 49%, I'm fine.
[Guest]: My thoughts on this are, I think what TechMindr did ultimately was very good.
[Guest]: Because I think they role modeled what, you know, in that sense, in terms of when the
[Guest]: issue comes out, how you respond, I thought the response was amazing.
[Guest]: And it also sent a strong message throughout, right, we will not tolerate this at all.
[Guest]: And in fact, TechMindr has since then, in another part of the book, I talk about how
[Guest]: they've launched, you know, same sex partnership benefits, and so many other things.
[Guest]: So since then, they've gone on a great learning journey, which is great.
[Guest]: So I'm, you know, was it good for the individual who went through this?
[Guest]: Of course not.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, he, I'm in touch with him.
[Guest]: And he has still been traumatized with that.
[Guest]: And that is what I talk about in the chapter, right?
[Guest]: I said, these are real people.
[Guest]: Even if you take all the steps, after something has been found, you know, it's very, very
[Guest]: hard, right?
[Guest]: That person has suffered for all these years.
[Guest]: I think this is only going to become less and less if companies role model this kind
[Guest]: of behavior, right?
[Guest]: So, I mean, I think it would be very naive to imagine that just because you have policies
[Guest]: and you have senior people who say this is the kind of world we want to create, we're
[Guest]: not going to have people, you know, who are going to be bigoted.
[Guest]: But which is why then you need to act, right?
[Guest]: You need to translate the intent of your policies into action.
[Guest]: If you are saying we don't discriminate, and when someone discriminates, how do you act?
[Guest]: Because everyone else is watching, right?
[Guest]: All the thousands of employees at Tech Mahindra were watching.
[Guest]: They were like, discrimination happened.
[Guest]: Look what happened.
[Guest]: The CEO tweeted, Anand Mahindra tweeted, inquiry was made, that person was fired.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Which means that rights matter here.
[Guest]: Which means that tomorrow, if I have some issue that I go to them with, they will take
[Guest]: me seriously.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And everyone else outside was also watching.
[Guest]: They said, look, here's a company, mistakes happen everywhere.
[Guest]: This thing has happened here.
[Guest]: They've acted in this way.
[Guest]: So I think it's how you behave at these moments also that matters.
[Guest]: I mean, you can role model more and more of this thing that we have a zero tolerance policy.
[Guest]: You know, it's very clear how we expect you to behave.
[Guest]: And I've given so many other, there's been so many other cases as well in the book, right?
[Guest]: I talk about say maybe a community business where Sandeep goes through and Sandeep has
[Guest]: a boss who's like, who makes a joke about, you know, when Sandeep says, I'm getting married
[Guest]: to my partner, this, you know, the insensitive boss says, why are you, you know, number nine
[Guest]: or something?
[Guest]: And then like, Sandeep raises the complaint.
[Guest]: Now this was a comment.
[Guest]: And then the company here sends that boss for sensitivity training.
[Guest]: And you know, the boss comes back and says, I'm sorry, I, you know, I made that comment.
[Guest]: I didn't realize.
[Guest]: And they go through that sensitivity training, right?
[Guest]: So there's, I think it's important to respond at this time, right?
[Guest]: And to say that as an organization, we are setting these policies, we are investing in
[Guest]: the in a culture of training our employees.
[Guest]: And if mistakes happen, here is how we are going to act on them.
[Guest]: I think the more and more you role model this good behavior, the less you have chances of
[Guest]: these incidents happening.
[Guest]: Another interesting case study is Kochi Metro, right?
[Guest]: Which is not about discrimination, but about the fact that, you know, this is an evolving
[Guest]: journey.
[Guest]: So Kochi Metro takes a great step of saying we want to increase, we want to hire trans
[Guest]: people, which is incredible.
[Guest]: A lot of trans people are hired, but then many of them leave, not because Kochi Metro
[Guest]: is necessarily a discriminating organization, but because they're unable to find houses,
[Guest]: because people don't want to rent, you know, homes to trans people.
[Guest]: And so it's very hard for them to like to arrive at work, to stay close to office and
[Guest]: to arrive at work, etc, right?
[Guest]: So as I write in the book, organizations have to think through some of these things.
[Guest]: Now Kochi Metro understood, relearned.
[Guest]: And I believe right now when it hires trans people, it goes a little extra mile in helping
[Guest]: them either as a guarantee in terms of, you know, when they're looking for houses in terms
[Guest]: of landlords and saying, we will serve as a guarantor or so on, but going that extra
[Guest]: mile.
[Guest]: So I think this is iterative.
[Guest]: There's enough examples also to show of how companies and, you know, Kochi Metro is not
[Guest]: a company, it's a state organization, are learning on the way, and learning how to,
[Guest]: you know, act decently and to be good.
[Guest]: So that gives me hope.
[Guest]: In that sense.
[Amit Varma]: You know, in your book, there's also the great example of the Lalit and, you know, how they
[Amit Varma]: have a policy of sort of hiring more and more trans employees.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, I mean, that, you know, one of the lessons perhaps from the book is that how
[Amit Varma]: incentives can also sort of shape culture, you know, as I keep saying in my economist
[Amit Varma]: jargony way, we'll take a quick commercial break now.
[Amit Varma]: And after we come back, we'll wrap up your personal journey.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll start talking about, you know, your work at Goodridge and, you know, everything
[Guest]: that you've been doing in the last 10 years.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: On the scene and the unseen, I often speak about positive sum games.
[Amit Varma]: Well, if you want to be surrounded by beauty, and you love fine art, I have a win-win proposition
[Amit Varma]: for you.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors licenses images of fine art from some of the best contemporary artists
[Amit Varma]: in India and adapts them to objects of everyday use like tote bags, pouches and home decor
[Amit Varma]: items.
[Amit Varma]: You get to surround yourself with the finest modern Indian art at affordable prices.
[Amit Varma]: And artists get royalties for every product you buy.
[Amit Varma]: Win-win game.
[Amit Varma]: The Indian Colors new ranges in and includes elegant yet comfortable dresses for women
[Amit Varma]: and casual shirts for men with standout motifs by artists such as Tanmoy Samanta, Manisha
[Amit Varma]: Ghera Baswadi, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra and Jaideep Mehrotra.
[Amit Varma]: Stay home, but dress smart.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown days, worry not, you can show them
[Amit Varma]: you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indian Colors.
[Amit Varma]: Corporate gifting is also available.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to IndianColors.com, that's Colors with an OU, and make art a part of
[Amit Varma]: your life.
[Amit Varma]: And hey, for a 15% discount, use the code Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: Unseen for 15% off at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen I'm chatting with Parmesh Shani on his wonderful
[Amit Varma]: book, Queeristan, which you know, is eye opening and there is so much to learn there even for
[Amit Varma]: someone who thinks that, you know, they know the subject very well.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, let's kind of get back to your sort of personal journey.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of the delightful things that struck me about your preface or your
[Amit Varma]: prologue or, you know, the start of your book was when you know, you point out how your
[Amit Varma]: dad got to know of your being gay through the BBC.
[Amit Varma]: That was pretty fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about that and how did he react and how did your parents kind of sort of deal
[Amit Varma]: with it?
[Guest]: Yeah, so it was, I was at MIT, I had just organized a big South Asian LGBTQ film festival
[Guest]: over there.
[Guest]: It was very hard because in the middle of my, you know, academic semester, I thought
[Guest]: he one must do this.
[Guest]: And so it was the first time that something like this was happening on the East Coast,
[Guest]: on the West Coast, there was, say, Tricorne and a lot of, you know, queer stuff happening.
[Guest]: But you know, Boston had Masala, which was a South Asian LGBTQ organization, but they'd
[Guest]: never really, and you know, New York had Salga and all, but they never attempted something
[Guest]: like, you know, like a queer festival of this nature before.
[Guest]: So it was newsworthy.
[Guest]: And a BBC journalist called me and they asked, they talked to us, talked to me about it.
[Guest]: And I happily gave the interview.
[Guest]: And the BBC chose to put it up on their front page, on their homepage, when the interview
[Guest]: ran.
[Guest]: And it was interesting because the top story was Parvez Musharraf and Parvez Musharraf's
[Guest]: picture, who at that time was first president of Pakistan.
[Guest]: And then below that was this article with my photo saying South Asian gays find US voice.
[Guest]: And it was very interesting because, you know, I started getting calls from people all around
[Guest]: the world saying, you know, BBC is saying that you're gay and you're doing all of this.
[Guest]: And my cousin actually called me for a moment.
[Guest]: She's like, listen, because I hadn't, I was out to my mom, but I wasn't out to my dad
[Guest]: at that time.
[Guest]: And so, yeah, so she was like, you know, it's not going to be fun if someone forwards this
[Guest]: to your dad.
[Guest]: I think you should call him.
[Guest]: So I called him and I had to tell him, I had to tell him a bunch of things.
[Guest]: I said, look, I'm gay and the whole world knows about it because the BBC did a story.
[Guest]: So, and, you know, the BBC is right, at least in those days it used to be right.
[Guest]: It was known for its accuracy.
[Guest]: Even now, I suppose.
[Guest]: So it's like, you know, it's on the BBC, it's true.
[Guest]: And he had to react at that, right?
[Guest]: So not only did he have to deal with the fact that his son was gay, he had to deal with
[Guest]: the fact that it was now a world story.
[Guest]: Given that, I think he was, it took him some time because he reacted more like a typical
[Guest]: Indian parent than my mom, because he was like, oh, what will the world, as the world
[Guest]: knows now already, no, darling?
[Guest]: He was like, oh, I wanted grandchildren.
[Guest]: I was like, we can get grandchildren, we can get grandchildren, don't worry.
[Guest]: Like, yeah, I thought you would get married.
[Guest]: I was like, we'll get married.
[Guest]: Just be a guy.
[Guest]: He was like, that's not what I had in mind.
[Guest]: Life is sometimes like that.
[Guest]: And over time, he has accepted.
[Guest]: Now with Queeristan out, he forwards me articles that he's read about it.
[Guest]: And he's like, I saw your show with Faye D'Souza, you spoke well, or things like that, right?
[Guest]: So it's been a journey.
[Guest]: With my mom, it was immediate.
[Guest]: It was kind of underwhelming, because I told my mom, mom, I think I'm gay.
[Guest]: And she was like, you think or you're sure?
[Guest]: And I was like, I'm sure I'm gay.
[Guest]: And she was like, okay, what should we have for dinner?
[Guest]: And that was really the conversation with her.
[Guest]: And I kind of felt cheated, because I had made all these like, you know, but you don't
[Guest]: understand but this, but that I made all these dialogues in my head, which I couldn't use.
[Guest]: And then I told her, I said, why aren't you having any drama?
[Guest]: And she was like, you know, I don't, what is there to have drama?
[Guest]: But she was like, refreshingly cool about it.
[Unknown]: Who took out the chickpeas from the cooker?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, if they're listening to this, hello, uncle and auntie.
[Amit Varma]: And let's kind of now move on, you're at MIT, you've you've even set up a sort of a kind
[Amit Varma]: of a forum there, you're, you know, you're considering, you know, helping to run that
[Amit Varma]: while you're there.
[Amit Varma]: And then you decide to come back to India and join the corporate life.
[Guest]: So how did that sort of shift, that was all because of, you know, Shahrukh Khan, I think
[Guest]: has ruined my life.
[Guest]: First with those ideas of love, romance, I'm also doing, you know, arms ahead and Yash
[Guest]: Chopra first, because of you know, Chandni and that rooftop helicopter rose petals, I
[Guest]: began to think, I also want like that only.
[Guest]: These days, if the husband smiles at me after waking up, I feel happy.
[Guest]: My ideas of romance and know everything.
[Guest]: I mean, I think Bollywood, I'm super Bollywood influenced.
[Guest]: So multiple things, actually, it's, I saw Swades, I think a lot of people who came back
[Guest]: at that time, you know, Shahrukh, Ashutosh, we could have been living nicely in Seattle.
[Guest]: You made us come back, I would have had a nice house with a picket fence.
[Guest]: And maybe like, you know, an exotic foreign husband.
[Guest]: No, I saw Swades, it was a bunch of things that had happened, I'd seen, I'd finished
[Guest]: my thesis, I was very tired, I was working on this, you know, MIT think tank that I'd
[Guest]: set up with Henry Jenkins, my professor, I was enjoying that.
[Guest]: I was interviewing, because I did want to, you know, stay back my I was, I was in a relationship,
[Guest]: I was in a committed relationship.
[Guest]: And my partner at that time was finishing his PhD at MIT.
[Guest]: So I did want to stay on in America.
[Guest]: But the kind of job offers I was getting were from Microsoft, and they were very nice.
[Guest]: But you know, I'd studied as a media, I mean, I studied as a humanist, and, you know, and
[Guest]: the kind of offers I was getting were to help market Windows, and things like that.
[Guest]: And it was very good money.
[Guest]: But I kind of didn't see how my background and my humanities training would be of any
[Guest]: use there.
[Guest]: So I was thinking these things through.
[Guest]: And then a bunch of things happened, you know, I saw Swades, and I was like, No, no, no,
[Guest]: I think I should use this, I should come back to India and see what I can do with these
[Guest]: different things that one has learned.
[Guest]: And I then happened to meet say, Anand and Anuradha in Boston who were visiting and they
[Guest]: were like, you know, listen, now that you're done or whatever, if you want to come and
[Guest]: work, come and work at Mahindra, there's lots that one can do.
[Guest]: So it was a combination of both of those things, the fact that there was a blank kind of canvas
[Guest]: waiting for me at Mahindra.
[Guest]: But plus, I'd seen Swades, I think if I'd had that conversation without seeing Swades,
[Guest]: I would have said, yeah, yeah, fine, fine.
[Guest]: But you know, I want to be here only.
[Guest]: If I'd seen Swades and not met them, then I mean, there was, there was the opportunity.
[Guest]: So I think it was everything.
[Guest]: There are days when I'm grateful I came back, there are days when I feel like I could have
[Guest]: been a nice foreign NRI gay person coming once every year or whatever, for weddings.
[Guest]: And I'm like, okay, whatever happened, happened.
[Guest]: Now I'm here.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's interesting that you should ascribe so much credit to Shah Rukh Khan because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, one of the quotes I really liked in your book was about how your friend Ian,
[Amit Varma]: Sir Ian to the rest of us, Sir Ian McKellen says that, you know, once he came out as gay,
[Amit Varma]: the nature of his acting changed, where, you know, you quote him telling you that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, coming out was such a relief on all accounts, everything improved, including my
[Amit Varma]: acting.
[Amit Varma]: Up until then, my acting was about disguising.
[Amit Varma]: After I came out, it became about revelation.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And that's such a beautiful quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it just made me sort of stop and think about it for a while before I continued reading.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that Shah Rukh Khan's acting is just all performative as Bollywood has
[Amit Varma]: to be and not about revelation at all.
[Amit Varma]: But that sort of aside apart, you also point out in your book about how sort of Ted India
[Amit Varma]: 2009, where, by the way, just to kind of tell our listeners, you know, Ted had their first
[Amit Varma]: conference in India, the only conference in India in 2009.
[Amit Varma]: And they selected a bunch of India fellows for that, which included, you know, Parmesh
[Amit Varma]: and me and, you know, various people you've named, like, you named Jasmeen Patheja of
[Amit Varma]: Blank Noise, who's done such incredible, innovative work.
[Amit Varma]: And so the bunch of us were all brought together in Mysore for this great TED conference.
[Amit Varma]: And even that, that Mysore at Infosys campus was crazy, because I think it was made by
[Amit Varma]: Hercules Contractor.
[Guest]: It was surreal because all the buildings were based on famous buildings.
[Amit Varma]: So somewhere there were the White House, somewhere there was a Capitol, somewhere there was the
[Amit Varma]: Parthenon and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And it was completely surreal, but also in a sense, perhaps an apt place to gather like
[Amit Varma]: this because it was this vast global gathering.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, for me, it was just an event where I go, I watch some great talks, which
[Amit Varma]: I could even have watched on YouTube, you know, and, you know, get to meet, get to hang
[Amit Varma]: out with cool people like you.
[Amit Varma]: But you've spoken about how it then, you know, gave you an impetus to do some of what you
[Amit Varma]: did next, especially later with the Godrej Culture Lab, tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: I will.
[Guest]: But before that, I want to dispute the fact that Shah Rukh's acting is all performative
[Guest]: and not about revelation.
[Guest]: As an avowed Shah Rukh fan, I would like to humbly disagree.
[Guest]: I think if you have seen Raees, if you have seen Zero, which I loved, I thought it was
[Guest]: one of his best films.
[Guest]: If you've seen Fan, which was incredible.
[Guest]: If you have seen Paheli, if you've seen Kabhi Haan Kabhi Na, if you've seen Chakde, if you've
[Guest]: seen The Ranger, if you've seen Swades, for that matter, you know, or Raju, or, you know,
[Guest]: if you see the range of films that Shah Rukh has done, they are so much about revelation.
[Guest]: I think one of the highlights of Shah Rukh is that he makes you feel that you are taking
[Guest]: a piece of him.
[Guest]: He genuinely gives that to you as well.
[Guest]: So I would urge you to relook Shah Rukh with a more loving gaze and discover the joy of
[Guest]: Shah Rukh, if you can.
[Amit Varma]: He gives you the same piece of him in every film, but we'll agree to disagree for the
[Amit Varma]: sake of amity and sort of continue with our conversation.
[Guest]: Tell me about TED India.
[Guest]: So sure.
[Guest]: So Shah Rukh incidentally also gave a great TED talk in Vancouver.
[Guest]: And I must tell you that at that same TED conference, which I happened to be there at
[Guest]: Vancouver, you know, there was Elon Musk hanging around on the side, no one cared much.
[Guest]: There was Al Gore was standing behind me in the buffet line, eating very quietly.
[Guest]: No one got any, you know, whatever.
[Guest]: But for Shah Rukh, the moment the door opened, the moment, whatever, there were like thousands
[Guest]: of people waiting in Vancouver, screaming their heads out.
[Guest]: So you know, Shah Rukh is Shah Rukh.
[Amit Varma]: I just say that, look, popularity is not a sign of quality.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, look at Modiji.
[Guest]: As a fan, as a Shah Rukh fan, as an avowed Shah Rukh fan, as a connoisseur of Shah Rukh
[Guest]: acting and revelation, sometimes you can have it all.
[Guest]: You can have...
[Amit Varma]: My God, you know, I had a similar conversation with Parumita Hora, she was on my show and
[Amit Varma]: she's also a Shah Rukh fan.
[Amit Varma]: So maybe you guys will make me reconsider.
[Amit Varma]: I don't think so, but it's kind of, I'll have to let you have the last word on this as we
[Guest]: kind of move ahead.
[Guest]: Okay, I can see you want to move ahead from talking.
[Guest]: Shah Rukh, we love you.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Having said that, yes, TED India being selected as a TED India fellow, and I would say off
[Guest]: late being a TED senior fellow, because I've just finished that stint has been quite transformative.
[Guest]: I mean, in 2009, TED was not this great global juggernaut.
[Guest]: You know, TED has just started putting up talks online.
[Guest]: And if you see some of these early talks, it's like, you know, it's not the kind of
[Guest]: highly produced TED talk, which has now almost become a meme, like, oh, you gave a TED talk,
[Guest]: okay, you're uncool, you know, that kind of thing hasn't come, that kind of, you know,
[Guest]: in those days, it was very, very early, it was very, very new.
[Guest]: And this whole format, which Chris and the team have like, you know, taken to such incredible
[Guest]: different directions over the years, was just about being, you know, coming into its own,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: So for me, being a TED was like a brain popping experience.
[Guest]: It transformed my life in so many ways, because at that time, I had agreed to, I had gone
[Guest]: back to America, I'd left the Mahindra job, I'd started a PhD at UPenn.
[Guest]: And I'd chosen to go back to digging deep again, I'd spent some years and, and my life
[Guest]: has been this constant tension between do I dig deep, or do I spread wide, you know.
[Guest]: And for those who are listening to the podcast, Amit is grinning right now.
[Guest]: No, it's not what you're thinking about Amit.
[Guest]: I wasn't grinning and I wasn't thinking that at all.
[Guest]: Naughty boy.
[Guest]: I was talking about my career.
[Guest]: So, you know, at that time, I had gone back to the PhD.
[Guest]: And I had said, you know, I want to spend some years and working on, on academic research.
[Guest]: But then I came to this, you know, then I got selected for the TED India Fellowship,
[Guest]: and then I flew back.
[Guest]: And to have a space where you could have science, humanities, medicine, people from NGOs, spirituality,
[Guest]: love, romance, dance, music, everything kind of come together fatafat one after the other
[Guest]: in this like, you know, bhel puri mix of like a brain massage, kind of, yeah, for me, I'd
[Guest]: never seen anything like it.
[Guest]: Just being there, witnessing it all.
[Guest]: And then witnessing all of us, right, seeing all these amazing TED India fellows, so many
[Guest]: of whom I've like, tracked with admiration over the years, right?
[Guest]: Someone like a Rikim Gandhi, who was my classmate, who was also with me at MIT, who then, who
[Guest]: was training to become, you know, training for NASA, who then left and formed an organization
[Guest]: called Digital Green, which works with farmers in rural India, giving them information and,
[Guest]: you know, technology access and things like that, to young schoolmasters like Babar Ali,
[Guest]: who, despite coming from such, you know, underprivileged backgrounds, were creating education alternatives
[Guest]: for so many children in their village in Bengal, to say, you know, artists like Sharmishta,
[Guest]: to like, you know, I mean, so just like, really, really, really, so it was both the conference
[Guest]: format that I was like, wow, you can have this kind of space to the people I was like,
[Guest]: you know, I read there are so many cool people in India, all of whom are doing such amazing
[Guest]: work.
[Guest]: I mean, so it I was like, I don't want to go back and like, spend six years and doing
[Guest]: this PhD.
[Guest]: I want to do something TED like, and that was the idea.
[Guest]: Now I didn't want to do TED India, I didn't want to do a three day conference.
[Guest]: But I was like, now what I want to do is I want to live in this state of TEDness of any
[Guest]: given day, I want to be mixing science, design, arts, policy, I want to like, you know, create
[Guest]: this space in India.
[Guest]: And what would it mean like to have this broad space like think.
[Guest]: So that was the, that was my idea.
[Guest]: I went back, I dropped out of the PhD program, which they didn't like, of course, because
[Guest]: you know, I had filled a seat.
[Guest]: And now suddenly I was dropping out.
[Guest]: And so they said, Look, we love you, but don't ever come back here again.
[Guest]: And of course, me being the drama queen said, who wants to come back to you, pen, X, never
[Guest]: I'll go anywhere but except to you all and you know, we had that kind of showdown.
[Guest]: And then I came back and then I started saying, Okay, now what to do?
[Guest]: How do I create the space?
[Guest]: And so I started talking to people, people from Mahindra, people, you know, I've encountered
[Guest]: people from the media, and randomly, one of Sandeep Murthy, who's an investor, who runs
[Guest]: Lightbox, which is one of the most exciting venture funds in India right now.
[Guest]: At that time, he was running Sharipalo and Ram Shriram's fund and Kleiner Perkins, etc.
[Guest]: And he was like, you know, you should meet Nisa.
[Guest]: I think she'll get you and y'all are both kind of mad and maybe y'all will hit it off.
[Guest]: And that was that.
[Guest]: And that's how I met Nisa, we met, we realized that we both, you know, we're very different
[Guest]: people.
[Guest]: But we connected on so many things we connected on design thinking on IDEO.
[Guest]: She wanted to know more about LGBTQ issues and my life.
[Guest]: And we just, we just started talking and she's like, Look, I don't know what your idea is.
[Guest]: I still don't understand what does it mean to create the space and blah, blah, blah.
[Guest]: But she's like, I like you.
[Guest]: So do you want to work at Godrej?
[Guest]: I was like, Godrej?
[Guest]: No, I mean, I want to do this.
[Guest]: She's like, Why don't you work here?
[Guest]: And you know, if you help me with other things, I'll let you do your idea.
[Guest]: And I was like, okay, that's and 10 years later, we're still here.
[Guest]: They're still arguing and talking and pushing each other and laughing and imagining.
[Guest]: And it's been amazing.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's been amazing.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And what was your conception of the Culture Lab when you started it?
[Amit Varma]: What did you want it to be at that early stage?
[Amit Varma]: And how has it then evolved?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So my original conception was very, I mean, you know, since I've been at a place like
[Guest]: MIT, it was a mixture of like, an institution, which is how the old world things of things,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So first, I said, maybe it should be a building with people.
[Guest]: And you know, like, like a building, because our model for spaces that I had seen were
[Guest]: like, cultural centers, like you have to have a building and office and all.
[Guest]: But then the MIT thinking started to kick in.
[Guest]: And I was like, you know, why does it need a space and this and also, I mean, Nisa didn't
[Guest]: give me much money.
[Guest]: She was like, you have one desk in this corner and like, you know, here's a little bit of
[Guest]: money.
[Guest]: One can do maybe one could have done one event or two events with that money.
[Guest]: It was like, clearly, this is not the kind of thing where we will have buildings and
[Guest]: large amounts of people and like things like that.
[Guest]: So it can't be like a university center.
[Guest]: It has to be something which is shape shifting, which is packable, and you can take it anywhere.
[Guest]: And so I mean, because of the nature and the frugality and you know, these challenges,
[Guest]: I think we kind of evolved a new kind of space.
[Guest]: So a lab could be an idea space.
[Guest]: So we started and I remember that I read something that in a paper that you know, my mentor Henry
[Guest]: Jenkins and my MIT classmate Sam Ford had written about surplus audiences.
[Guest]: And they've done a great white paper on wrestling fans on professional wrestling fans.
[Guest]: And they said that, you know, we have to look at this idea of surplus, right?
[Guest]: So WWE, this professional wrestling, when they tend to think of who their audience is,
[Guest]: they used to think earlier that their audience would be 18 to 35 white male, whatever.
[Guest]: But as they did research, they realized, I mean, what is professional wrestling like
[Guest]: it's naked men, naked sweaty men in a ring, doing very highly and you know, WWE, it's
[Guest]: all kind of larger than life performance.
[Guest]: So who likes seeing this?
[Guest]: They said, you know, a lot of women were seeing this.
[Guest]: Some women like seeing naked men throwing themselves against each other and jumping
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: So we have not thought of women as our audience, but like, you know, that's a surplus audience.
[Guest]: And they looked and they said, who else likes seeing this?
[Guest]: It's like, you know, gay men like seeing, you know, naked men in chaddis jumping up
[Guest]: and down on each other.
[Guest]: They all gay men is another demographic.
[Guest]: So as they did that, they said, Okay, so this idea of surplus was very interesting.
[Guest]: And, you know, so I started thinking of that.
[Guest]: And I started thinking of, can we create a lab with the surplus of what is already around
[Guest]: us?
[Guest]: So then I said, Okay, you know, I have this, there is like, at that time, we didn't have
[Guest]: an auditorium of the size that we do now, there was a small conference room somewhere
[Guest]: in there, I said, but chalo, it's being used for office buildings and meetings and all.
[Guest]: But if we arrange the chairs like this, it kind of becomes an auditorium.
[Guest]: So I don't need to create a building without it, there is already a thing, right?
[Guest]: It's just that when people are not using it, I'll use it.
[Guest]: And everything came from that.
[Guest]: So the time people tended not to use this conference room kind of auditorium space was
[Guest]: at end of the week, 5pm on Fridays, it was easy to get booking at that time.
[Guest]: So we said all our events will be at 5pm on Fridays, because nobody else was booking it
[Guest]: at Godrej's at that time.
[Guest]: And since then, it's kind of stayed there, whatever.
[Guest]: So a lot of those decisions came from that we said, What if we don't have?
[Guest]: So then we began to look at permanence, impermanence, again, inspired by, you know, by my friends
[Guest]: like Rahul Mehrotra, the architect, and, you know, Rahul, who is now Dean of Graduate Studies
[Guest]: at the Harvard School of Design, has done a lot of work on permanence and impermanence
[Guest]: and how do you build for impermanence.
[Guest]: And one of his things has been recently he's been studying the Kumbh Mela, as you know,
[Guest]: as a fantastic site, where you honor the earth, because it's eco friendly, because the entire
[Guest]: city is built for a short period of time, and then it's dismantled, and it's taken away.
[Guest]: So unlike, say, the waste of building for the Olympics, or things like that, right,
[Guest]: where so many countries build a whole infrastructure, which then is left behind, as a dead, you
[Guest]: know, as this big white elephant that you don't know what to do with the Kumbh Mela
[Guest]: are interesting, because they give you this framework of saying, you can design for impermanence,
[Guest]: what matters is the gathering, what matters is not the building.
[Guest]: So I was very informed by things like that.
[Guest]: So a lot of the culture labs, whether it's philosophy, whether it's cross pollination,
[Guest]: whether it's the fact that we have a loose shape shifting lab, which kind of every few
[Guest]: years changes what we do.
[Guest]: You know, from an event space, we said we are event space, but we're also resource space.
[Guest]: So we started doing white papers that served people more.
[Guest]: We've off late said we had an education space.
[Guest]: So we started doing fellowships at various levels for like, you know, college students
[Guest]: and things like that.
[Guest]: So we said that we had a cultural node and cultural connector.
[Guest]: So we started connecting other cultural organizations in the country, in interesting ways to come
[Guest]: together.
[Guest]: So whether it is what we do, how we imagine ourselves as this Jugaroo kind of place, you
[Guest]: know, which kind of exists through the ephemeral, a lot of our events are about transience.
[Guest]: So we started by doing a lot of these pop-up museums.
[Guest]: We did a museum of memory as our first pop-up in 2011, which was an old factory that was
[Guest]: being demolished the next day.
[Guest]: And we filled it for one whole day with art, design, talks, dance performances.
[Guest]: The next day, the bulldozers came and demolished everything.
[Guest]: So it was an interesting experience.
[Guest]: And everyone who was there, and there were hundreds, if not thousands of people knew
[Guest]: that they were taking part in the happy death day party of that factory.
[Guest]: So what does it mean to honor, you know, a space by, through this kind of solidarity,
[Guest]: knowing very well together that tomorrow it won't be there.
[Guest]: But what will remain are the moments we create and the digital archive, which is a trace.
[Guest]: So a lot of that has kind of informed the work that we do.
[Guest]: We're not obsessed with permanence, but we are obsessed with connections, creating connections
[Guest]: between our speakers and performers, or our speakers and our audience, or giving resources
[Guest]: and things like that.
[Guest]: But it's all, I mean, so the influences have been vast and varied from architecture, from
[Guest]: philosophy, from Kenya Hara, who is this incredible Japanese designer.
[Guest]: You know, he was the chief designer of Muji, and he did the Nagano Olympics, spoke to me
[Guest]: once about emptiness.
[Guest]: And you know, he's known for his minimalism.
[Guest]: And I hate minimalism as a design practice.
[Guest]: I mean, I hate it.
[Guest]: I'm a maximalist.
[Guest]: I think minimalism is boring as hell.
[Guest]: You know, this whole like one long gray table with one marigold on the corner.
[Guest]: I mean, it drives me crazy.
[Guest]: I'm like, if you give me a small table, I'll want to keep a hundred things on it.
[Amit Varma]: You know,
[Amit Varma]: This explains our disagreement on Shah Rukh, by the way, because I like minimalism a bit
[Amit Varma]: more.
[Guest]: Oh God.
[Guest]: Why be minimalist when you can be maximalist anyway.
[Guest]: So Kenya Hara, who, and he has built Muji on minimalism, as I was telling you, it's
[Guest]: like, you know, no, he's like, fine.
[Guest]: He's like, let's not think of minimalism.
[Guest]: He's like, why don't you look at it as emptiness?
[Guest]: And he's like, you hate minimalism, don't, he's like, I designed for emptiness.
[Guest]: And emptiness is not minimalism.
[Guest]: Emptiness is, I give you something that you can fill how you want.
[Guest]: So when I'm giving you something that's gray and utilitarian, it is empty, I'm offering
[Guest]: it to you, do what you want.
[Guest]: And I thought that was interesting as a way of viewing life, right?
[Guest]: How can you design for emptiness so that everyone who goes away takes, you know, fills it with
[Guest]: their own perspective.
[Guest]: So anyway, the lab philosophy and has grown from so many various influences, people who
[Guest]: flow through it, are incredible team members over the years.
[Guest]: We've had some brilliant people, mostly young, you know, flow through the lab, you know,
[Guest]: come spend some years with the lab.
[Guest]: They've gone on to do amazing things.
[Guest]: You know, one of our alums is in Spain doing incredible work.
[Guest]: Another one left the lab and joined the UN, has been building toilets across the country
[Guest]: as part of Swachh Bharat and then through, you know, a private CSR initiative.
[Guest]: Someone else joined the lab, he had trained as a lawyer, joined the lab, discovered so
[Guest]: many other things and is now a fashion stylist at Grazia.
[Guest]: So it's been quite amazing.
[Guest]: I think the legacy of the lab is just the incredible, you know, people who have spoken
[Guest]: at it, collaborated with it and worked at it.
[Guest]: So it's been an interesting journey.
[Guest]: But really thinking about some of these things of like, you know, permanence versus impermanence
[Guest]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: No, and that's so fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: I need to sort of think deeper about it and process all of it.
[Amit Varma]: It also strikes me that, you know, virtual spaces also by their very nature are impermanent
[Amit Varma]: in a way.
[Amit Varma]: They've kind of been, you know, forced upon us now by the circumstances of the lockdown.
[Amit Varma]: And it also just struck me when you were speaking about filling emptiness that every time I
[Amit Varma]: embark upon recording a conversation like this, I am actually what I'm trying to do
[Amit Varma]: is fill that emptiness of the space that lies ahead for the two or three hours that the
[Amit Varma]: conversation lasts.
[Amit Varma]: I want to now, you know, let's kind of move on to the book, which also sort of describes,
[Amit Varma]: you know, how you straddle these two different worlds simultaneously, like I was very struck
[Amit Varma]: by your phrasing early on in the book, where you speak about how you have a day job plus
[Amit Varma]: a gay job.
[Amit Varma]: And the gay job, of course, is the sort of advocacy where you get corporates to become
[Amit Varma]: more LGBTQ friendly.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you described that elsewhere in the book, quote, I am arguing from my unique
[Amit Varma]: inside out position as a corporate person working on LGBTQ issues, and my outside in
[Amit Varma]: position as an activist and cultural creator using the corporate world to advance my agenda,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this is not just within Godrej, elsewhere you write, quote, I use every occasion that
[Amit Varma]: I can to talk about LGBTQ issues.
[Amit Varma]: The Red Bull Music Academy invites me for a talk, I'll queer it.
[Amit Varma]: The Elle Decor India Design ID Summit, you bet.
[Amit Varma]: A new Columbia Business School batch is visiting India, time for a gay lecture.
[Amit Varma]: The Society for Human Resource Management, pretty obvious what I'll be speaking about.
[Amit Varma]: If I am visiting Yale, Brandeis or Harvard or the Edinburgh International Culture Summit
[Amit Varma]: at the Scottish Parliament, the desi rainbow flag flies on foreign soil too, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you mentioned early on at one part when I think you know, Anand Mahindra
[Amit Varma]: offered you a job and you asked him that does your company have same sex spousal benefits?
[Amit Varma]: And he was like, well, not yet.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, we can do something like that for you.
[Amit Varma]: And from that, to making this an actual mission, and in my mind is very much, it feels bottom
[Amit Varma]: up to me that you're getting, you're talking to corporations and getting them to voluntarily
[Amit Varma]: sort of put these practices in play.
[Amit Varma]: How did this come about?
[Amit Varma]: Because it obviously evolved into something that had a sense of a mission about it.
[Amit Varma]: Was it like that from the start?
[Amit Varma]: And or, you know, how did you kind of view it going into Godrej?
[Amit Varma]: Did you think that this is something I've got to spend so much time on as you ended
[Amit Varma]: up doing?
[Guest]: Yeah, it's very strategic.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, even calling it a gay job, I mean, I say it in jest and also to rhyme,
[Guest]: but also very much, because it is, there is a certain performativity, which comes through
[Guest]: in the writing in Queeristan, but which also very much comes through in how I choose to
[Guest]: present and interact with the world.
[Guest]: There is a visibilization that I do.
[Guest]: And I do it with intent, because it is a form of queering.
[Guest]: I do want to queer a business in multiple ways, right?
[Guest]: One is to, what would it mean for business to have a queer person, very visibly queer
[Guest]: out there in their midst, right?
[Guest]: So I'm querying business with my presence and with my vociferous presence.
[Amit Varma]: What do you mean by visibilization, sorry?
[Guest]: Because I just like other straight people talk about, you know, their lives, I mean,
[Guest]: I talk in my business meetings, someone will say, because you know, people in business
[Guest]: don't just talk about work, right?
[Guest]: Someone will say, you know, my daughter's school this, now her 10th standard exam, I'll
[Guest]: say, you know, my partner, this, my this, my that.
[Guest]: And I think for too long, I mean, that's the other thing also, right?
[Guest]: Either queer people are closeted, so they don't share, or they're not there.
[Guest]: So a lot of people don't know what it's like, I mean, you know, and at least Godrej with
[Guest]: our senior leaders, everything, I make sure that if someone is talking about straightness,
[Guest]: I will make sure that I talk about queerness, because it should be as normal for them to
[Guest]: listen to what I did on the weekend.
[Guest]: You know, I can say my partner and me, we went here, we did this, as it is for me to
[Guest]: listen to them about what they did on the weekend.
[Guest]: So I mean, so when I say queer business, I queer business with my voice and my presence.
[Guest]: But also with everything else, with the idea of, you know, what does it mean?
[Guest]: So I love wearing bowties, you know, and I wear bowties a lot at business meetings, etc.
[Guest]: I don't know if it's not this, but like, I think over the years, Godrej has changed to
[Guest]: people can wear what they want.
[Guest]: And you know, all the way with me with my flamboyant bowties to someone else who may
[Guest]: choose not to wear a tie, who may choose to wear jeans and t-shirts, right?
[Guest]: So I'd like to think that my presence, in terms of being so confident with my dress
[Guest]: sense has empowered other people to say, why do we have a formal dress code, let's all
[Guest]: dress the way we want, right?
[Guest]: So that's another way of queering business, I suppose.
[Guest]: And in so many other ways, right?
[Guest]: In terms of just thinking about things in terms of how can we think differently and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: Likewise, when I say I have a day job, I have a gay job.
[Guest]: The gay job is very much about interjecting this in other companies and talking to at
[Guest]: every location, at every space, etc. to widen people's horizons and imagine queerness and
[Guest]: inclusion as something that they can do.
[Guest]: But also to visibilize it for them that here is this person who's queer, you know, himself.
[Guest]: So in that sense, it is very much me.
[Guest]: So I'm not inauthentic.
[Guest]: But I'm very conscious of the performative aspect of my gayness in that sense.
[Guest]: And it is strategic and, you know, and I do it with great intent.
[Guest]: And I don't leave any space where I can talk about the issues that matter.
[Guest]: Because I know that, because who knows?
[Guest]: And that's the thing, right?
[Guest]: It might be a summit, it might be something, I do it for multiple reasons.
[Guest]: One is to widen people's horizons, open their minds.
[Guest]: Secondly, in that audience, there might be a young queer person, you know, who is going
[Guest]: through doubt, who is thinking, am I the only one who is thinking, maybe the world isn't
[Guest]: going to get better, who's thinking all these things.
[Guest]: And I want to show that person that here is someone who is working at a company, who is
[Guest]: trying to bring about change.
[Guest]: And don't worry, you know, it's going to be a better world for you, don't worry.
[Guest]: So one of the other reasons I do it is also to give people the sense of, you know, I'm
[Guest]: visibilizing to also give them hope.
[Guest]: And this has happened.
[Guest]: I write in the book about how I give a lecture at IAMCoryCode one year.
[Guest]: And I often do recruitment for Godrej, right?
[Guest]: I go and talk about, and of course, my half an hour recruitment lecture will be 27 minutes
[Guest]: about LGBTQ rights in India and three minutes about why they should join Godrej.
[Guest]: And that's fine.
[Guest]: Because you give me a stage, I'll talk about LGBTQ inclusion.
[Guest]: So I, you know, did this one year.
[Guest]: And you know, there was this one girl who stood in the corner and just looked at me
[Guest]: and didn't come up.
[Guest]: And this often happens.
[Guest]: Sometimes students will come up, they'll say, Sir, can we take selfie, this was cool, etc.
[Guest]: And sometimes people will just like kind of hang out.
[Guest]: Next year, I went back again.
[Guest]: And this girl came up to me and said, you know, I heard you.
[Guest]: It was so because you know, I'm lesbian.
[Guest]: I'd come I was, you know, I was very scared.
[Guest]: I'd come to this place.
[Guest]: I didn't know if IAMC would be a welcoming, inclusive environment, but just hearing you
[Guest]: speak and you being not embarrassed at all and you speaking about it so naturally, gave
[Guest]: me the confidence.
[Guest]: I've come out.
[Guest]: I'm part of the IAMC LGBTQ support group.
[Guest]: And you know, we're going to do such incredible work, right?
[Guest]: So one doesn't know how one's presence and when one talks about it, how it can benefit
[Guest]: so many others, which is I think, like, you know, for me, this visibilizing aspect is
[Guest]: very, very important.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it's so fascinating that this is like a strategic choice that you made.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll take one more tangent, which I promise will be the last tangent because we really
[Amit Varma]: ought to get to the meat of the book, but I couldn't help this tangent because it's a subject
[Amit Varma]: that's kind of close to my heart.
[Amit Varma]: You spoke earlier about how it is not only young people who are addicted to their gadgets,
[Amit Varma]: but also, you know, old fogies like us, at least old fogies like me, I don't want to
[Amit Varma]: offend you by calling you like us.
[Amit Varma]: And so I was watching a heck of a lot, a lot of TikTok for a while last year.
[Amit Varma]: And I found it remarkable because, you know, one, obviously, we know how the spread of
[Amit Varma]: broadband after, you know, Jio really took over that space has, you know, empowered so
[Amit Varma]: many more people with broadband than they otherwise would have had access to.
[Amit Varma]: And TikTok was a very fascinating example of, you know, cultural expression being enabled
[Amit Varma]: by this.
[Amit Varma]: I have always felt that whatever we see in mainstream entertainment, including Bollywood,
[Amit Varma]: it is either the content is driven by insiders who've been there forever, but have regressive
[Amit Varma]: views of Indian society, or elite outsiders who've come with notions that don't transplant
[Amit Varma]: so easily on, you know, Indian soil as it were, you know, to paraphrase Ambedkar's words
[Amit Varma]: in an unusual context, they're top dressing on Indian soil.
[Amit Varma]: But what TikTok gave me a sense was that here was because the means of production and distribution
[Amit Varma]: was so democratized, that here was sort of this enormous outpouring of what our culture
[Amit Varma]: really was like.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things which I found so heartening was that there was so much, you know, gay
[Amit Varma]: expression on it, LGBTQ expression on it to the extent that, you know, when the war between
[Amit Varma]: YouTubers and TikTokers erupted, a lot of the pejoratives or YouTubers were using were,
[Amit Varma]: you know, homophobic pejoratives, like all of that nonsense.
[Amit Varma]: And I found it interesting that I think, and I wonder if you'd agree, that what I found
[Amit Varma]: happening on TikTok is that because there were so many LGBTQ people who were expressing
[Amit Varma]: these alternate sexualities, and even women expressing, you know, different aspects of
[Amit Varma]: femininity than you'd otherwise see in popular culture, it created what you know, the sociologist
[Amit Varma]: Timur Kuran calls a preference cascade, that people watching this no doubt felt empowered
[Amit Varma]: by this visualization, as you say, by knowing that there are so many other people who are
[Amit Varma]: like me who share the same tastes as me, and you just had an explosion of content, which
[Amit Varma]: is why I feel it's like incredibly tragic and almost heartbreaking that TikTok got banned
[Amit Varma]: more than I would feel about any other app.
[Amit Varma]: What are sort of your thoughts on this?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, is this something that, you know, gets spoken about, and so on?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I have a whole section in the book on TikTok, actually, which I love, which,
[Guest]: you know, comes towards the end.
[Guest]: And yeah, I mean, if I wish I knew about cascading preferentiality, I would have used it in the
[Guest]: book.
[Guest]: But I do want to if I can just read out that section from the book, which I think explains
[Guest]: it wonderfully, right.
[Guest]: So this comes after me writing about so many of these TikTok videos with, you know, gay
[Guest]: men, gay, you know, either couple, single, etc, that, you know, my partner and me see
[Guest]: every morning, at least used to see while having breakfast together.
[Guest]: And you know, and this is how I end that section.
[Guest]: I read this TikTok co-option by queer Indian youth as a form of mimicry and hybridity to
[Guest]: use two popular terms from the cultural theorist Homi Bhabha.
[Guest]: I started this chapter by saying that we first need to imagine queeristan and then live in
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: I see the different acts of heteronormative mimicry being performed by the men in the
[Guest]: video and the videos as both homage to heteronormative romance, as well as the articulation of a
[Guest]: radical queer agenda.
[Guest]: Over the course of repeated viewing, and because there are so many of these videos being produced
[Guest]: and circulated, this performed queerness gets de-linked from the heteronormative homage
[Guest]: it started off and becomes valid on its own terms.
[Guest]: I consider this ubiquitous normalization of queer desires to be super exciting.
[Guest]: We are no longer a minuscule minority.
[Guest]: Through TikTok, we are showing ourselves and being seen all across India with every
[Guest]: right swipe.
[Guest]: And that's what I feel, which is why I think it's really tragic that TikTok was banned,
[Guest]: but also because there's such a class element to it, right?
[Guest]: Because so many of the TikTok superstars come from smaller towns, smaller cities, a range
[Guest]: of languages, say versus, for example, Instagram users who tend to be mostly big cities or
[Guest]: English speaking and so on, right?
[Guest]: So it's an economic cost, because so many TikTok stars and influencers were making money
[Guest]: off TikTok in that sense, right?
[Guest]: So I think it's quite sad that TikTok is gone as of now.
[Guest]: So maybe it will come back, and all the TikTok stars can get back to being fabulous and showing
[Guest]: everyone around them, you know, the range of queer possibilities that exist across this
[Amit Varma]: country.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and that glass angle is indeed very stark, because you know, you know, you and
[Amit Varma]: I being having grown up so privileged have had access to all the platforms we would want
[Amit Varma]: to have access to.
[Amit Varma]: And it just strikes me that TikTok just gave a platform to people who never had any platform
[Amit Varma]: of any kind, not just in terms of performing themselves, but just watching entertainment
[Amit Varma]: by people like themselves, and then perhaps being inspired to do stuff of their own, which
[Amit Varma]: was fantastic.
[Amit Varma]: Getting back to your day job plus gay job, as it were, you've also you know, at one point
[Amit Varma]: in your book, you had a couple of lines where you talk about all the talks, you go from
[Amit Varma]: talk to talk to talk, and you're doing all of that with a sense of mission.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, you write, not all of these talks are easy to do.
[Amit Varma]: And I sometimes find it tedious to repeat myself or answer really basic questions.
[Amit Varma]: But what to do, diversity line mein yeh sab karna padta hai.
[Amit Varma]: And I found this very charming, by the way, this interjection of your own voice, which
[Amit Varma]: is so, you know, true to you and makes a book feel like, you know, someone close to you
[Amit Varma]: is sitting and talking to you rather than you're reading some boring academic track.
[Amit Varma]: But how hard was sort of, like, what was the journey like, I mean, I would imagine perhaps
[Amit Varma]: in a simplistic way that people are much more open now than they might have been when, you
[Guest]: know, you began 10 years ago, but no, really, no, I people are still, it's still very early
[Guest]: days.
[Guest]: It's still really early days.
[Guest]: Still I will, you know, and I'm happy that they're calling me and I'm very happy to go
[Guest]: and I'm happy to talk till it will be a sea of, you know, last year, I did organizational
[Guest]: of pharmaceutical producing industries, etc, OPPA is the largest pharma body in the country.
[Guest]: So incredible, and I'm glad that they were doing a diversity day.
[Guest]: You know, they had so many, but I go on stage.
[Guest]: And one of the other things that I do is if, you know, if I'm giving a talk, and they said
[Guest]: I make sure that the other people on the panel are different, because, you know, I, again,
[Guest]: I'm, I'm very conscious, I don't want them to think the LGBT means having three gay men.
[Guest]: So I just, you know, I make sure I said, you know, do you have a someone who's a lesbian
[Guest]: by, do you have a trans person, you know, I'm happy with a well meaning ally and things
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: But I really want you to even visually show when you are showing people who are thinking
[Guest]: about diversity for the first time, it can't be cis gay men, you need to have a range of
[Guest]: people even visibly to show people right.
[Guest]: And I think people are understanding this more and more that, you know, when you talk
[Guest]: about diversity, it has to be people speaking up for ourselves, right.
[Guest]: So this was again, you know, this particular thing, it was me, Naina, who's a trans woman
[Guest]: from Bangalore, who's a friend who's in the book, you know, Neelam Jain, who runs an incredible
[Guest]: periphery, which is an enterprise that places trans people and so on.
[Guest]: And the three of us on stage, and we see the sea of blue suits.
[Guest]: And it's literally like 200 men in the room, all wearing blue suits, or like shirts and
[Guest]: pants and maybe like four or five women in saris conspicuous.
[Guest]: And you know, they're on the sides, they're the organizers.
[Guest]: And it's so interesting, right?
[Guest]: It's so interesting, because, and there are glass ceilings, right, in corporate India,
[Guest]: because if you look, you know, even now, in so many companies, entry level will be 50-50
[Guest]: now, because more and more companies, even basic gender, right, will say, we need to
[Guest]: hire more women.
[Guest]: But by the time you reach senior leadership, it's 5%, 8%, 10%, and every level women drop
[Guest]: off, either due to marriage, then so many women drop off after, you know, having a child
[Guest]: and things like that.
[Guest]: And by the time you reach top management, it's a sea of men in blue suits.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I had an episode with the amazing Namita Bhandari on how women's participation
[Amit Varma]: in the workforce has actually gone down over the last 15 years, which is just mind blowing
[Guest]: to me.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, needless to say that when you have a room full of men in blue suits, there will
[Guest]: be one or two silly questions.
[Guest]: So I answer them with really with love and humor, and there's no other way.
[Guest]: So and with empathy, and I try and like personalize it, right.
[Guest]: So with a lot of people, I can understand, there is so much ignorance.
[Guest]: So I say just ask, even if even if it's a bad question, it's better you ask and we can
[Guest]: answer you then you don't ask and you have this misguided assumption.
[Guest]: I get lots of silly questions, questions ranging all the way from if we offer this basic stuff,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: So I mean, now more and more progressive companies are offering gender affirmation surgery to
[Guest]: their employees.
[Guest]: They're not offering anything extra.
[Guest]: It's just that say, if you were working at Godrej, and your health insurance would be
[Guest]: five lakhs or whatever.
[Guest]: If you happen to transition, you can use your health insurance coverage of that same amount
[Guest]: to transition.
[Guest]: Nothing the company has to do, they're paying the same premium for you as everyone else,
[Guest]: just that your insurer will have to cover that.
[Guest]: And most insurers across the country are understanding and covering it because it's you know, when
[Guest]: you do a group insurance, you pay a group premium and whether they use it for a heart
[Guest]: attack or an accident or this, it doesn't matter to the insurance.
[Guest]: They charge your premium based on how many people in the group they think will avail
[Guest]: of it or whatever, right.
[Guest]: So still, I mean, this is, and more and more companies are offering gender affirmation,
[Guest]: but you will still hear, there'll be someone who will say, hey, but you know, if I offer
[Guest]: this, what if so many trans people join me just to do the surgery, and then they leave,
[Guest]: you know, and then you have to explain to them, first of all, it's not like eating an
[Guest]: ice cream or going to the movie or whatever.
[Guest]: It's not like, let's transition.
[Guest]: It's a process.
[Guest]: It takes time.
[Guest]: You have to go through so many evaluations, a doctor has to certify that you're ready
[Guest]: to transition, you have to begin hormones, then you do the surgery, it takes a lot of
[Guest]: time.
[Guest]: Anyone who wants to transition would be serious about it, would be uncomfortable living in
[Guest]: a body different from the one that they feel and so on.
[Guest]: So it's a long process.
[Guest]: No one is going to join you just to avail of the benefit and then leave.
[Guest]: In fact, it would be the contrary.
[Guest]: They would join you, they would feel happy that you are offering them this benefit, which
[Guest]: is so important to them, and it would probably make them more loyal.
[Guest]: So think about it as you would think about, say, you know, maternity leave, right?
[Guest]: Now it is a norm for you to give six months maternity leave, right?
[Guest]: You don't say, oh, someone will join me, become pregnant and then leave.
[Guest]: No, no.
[Guest]: You've understood that maternity is something and you can't be equal in this because as
[Guest]: far as we know right now, men are not able to carry babies.
[Guest]: So it's something which, you know, that you have to offer your women employees, right?
[Guest]: You don't think, you've stopped thinking, I don't know if anyone thought, will someone
[Guest]: join me, take six months maternity leave and then leave.
[Guest]: So earlier when I was younger, I would get maybe irritable and angry and say, what rubbish,
[Guest]: what rubbish.
[Guest]: Now it's just extreme patience.
[Guest]: I understand that so many of these questions might come out of ignorance.
[Guest]: I don't think it's willful malice or homophobia at times.
[Guest]: I think I like to give people the benefit of doubt, maybe they don't know.
[Guest]: So then I explain to them patiently, things like that, or I personalize it for them.
[Guest]: Like when people say, when did you know you were gay, I say, when did you know you were
[Guest]: straight?
[Guest]: And they're like, ha ha ha, I say, same, no, I mean, you know, they're like, uh, it often
[Guest]: helps with people to say, you know, think about this.
[Guest]: What if your child was queer?
[Guest]: Would you be thinking like this?
[Guest]: Wouldn't you like your child to go to a school and college in which they were respected and
[Guest]: not treated differently?
[Guest]: Remember that the queer people who are coming and working for us are also someone else's
[Guest]: children.
[Guest]: So if you don't want your child to be treated differently somewhere else, should you be
[Guest]: treating?
[Guest]: So I think a lot of times you have to kind of use different methods and getting the message
[Guest]: across.
[Guest]: Is it tiring?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: Is it tedious?
[Guest]: One of the reasons I wrote this book was also so that I can tell people just read the book
[Guest]: and then ask questions later, because anything that can be answered by the book, please don't
[Amit Varma]: ask me.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that can make you very unpopular because one of the things that I have been warned
[Amit Varma]: not to say to my friends when we are discussing something is, hey, just listen to that episode.
[Amit Varma]: But but no, I think I think the book is kind of a great service to all of us.
[Amit Varma]: And I found a couple of terms that you've used in your book concepts, rather extremely
[Amit Varma]: fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd like you to sort of go over them for our listeners.
[Amit Varma]: One of them is Jugaar resistance.
[Amit Varma]: What is, I know what is Jugaar and I know what is resistance, tell me about Jugaar resistance.
[Guest]: The term that I use for my resourceful way of bringing about change by placing myself
[Guest]: within the system.
[Guest]: Because I preface that by saying, you know, I have a lot of friends who are in academia
[Guest]: and activism, who think I'm a sellout or who don't like that I'm in the corporate world.
[Guest]: And they say, you know, likewise, I have a lot of friends, the corporate world are very
[Guest]: skeptical of people who are activists, right?
[Guest]: They'd say, are those chola walas, are those this, are those that, or like, you know, academics
[Guest]: or whatever.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So I see a lot of distrust.
[Guest]: But the point is, they're all my friends, and they're all incredible.
[Guest]: And they're all doing amazing work.
[Guest]: So, you know, I think of Jugaar resistance as like this thing that I do, which is, you
[Guest]: know, am I okay with the status quo?
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: Do I want to resist and create a better world, a better, you know, post pandemic, a better
[Guest]: new normal, a more inclusive new normal, all of that, yes.
[Guest]: I have chosen to locate myself within the system.
[Guest]: But within the system, how can I resist?
[Guest]: How can I kind of keep the door open and, and kind of have this build spaces for conversations
[Guest]: in which, you know, people from these multiple silos can hang out and maybe help each other.
[Guest]: That is my Jugaar.
[Guest]: So it's this kind of micro revolutions of change by placing oneself within the system.
[Guest]: And drawback of that is that everyone could dislike you, like, you know, your corporate
[Guest]: world would not trust you, because they think, you know, at heart, you're an activist and
[Guest]: academic, and activists and academics might not like you, because they think you're from
[Guest]: the system.
[Guest]: But I found, thankfully, that the contrary is true.
[Guest]: I think if you tell everyone very honestly, this is who I am.
[Guest]: This is where I'm from, darling, this is what I want to do.
[Guest]: They appreciate the honesty.
[Guest]: And thankfully, that's what I found over the past 10 years, at least the people appreciate
[Guest]: that I'm transparent, I'm saying, look, I'm not saying anything more.
[Guest]: I'm saying this is me, I place myself here, here's what I want to do.
[Guest]: Let's try and do this together.
[Guest]: Does it have limitations?
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: I mean, that's which I acknowledge, right?
[Guest]: I even acknowledge in the book, that I'm being permitted to do all of this, I'm being allowed
[Guest]: to do all of this.
[Guest]: And any given time, given that I operate within, you know, a framework, a structure, an institution,
[Guest]: not a, you know, a job, whatever, it could be found not useful, it could be shut down.
[Guest]: So I understand that I'm at the mercy of, you know, larger structural forces at play.
[Guest]: And I operate very much from this position of structural inequality, saying that I know
[Guest]: this is a system in which we work, I know that there is maybe a toehold that one has,
[Guest]: how can I use this toehold to maybe make the world better is what I'm trying to do in the
[Amit Varma]: book.
[Amit Varma]: And, and let's take a quick commercial break now, and when we come back, we'll continue
[Amit Varma]: talking about, you know, your book, and I promise I won't hold you up too much after
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: There will be no more tangential digressions as I am wont to indulge in.
[Amit Varma]: So see you in a minute.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Hi, I'm Vivek Kaul.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Here to tell you about a new weekly podcast that Vivek and I have launched called Econ
[Unknown]: Central.
[Unknown]: In Econ Central, we will help you make sense of the economic news of the last week.
[Unknown]: And we'll also try to explain complex subjects in a simple language.
[Amit Varma]: We will also take events outside the world of economics, like from politics, sports,
[Amit Varma]: literature, and explain them through the lens of economic thinking.
[Unknown]: Why is the stock market going up when the economy is going down?
[Unknown]: What's the deal with high petrol prices?
[Amit Varma]: Should we boycott Chinese goods?
[Amit Varma]: What does free speech have to do with incentives?
[Amit Varma]: Why are the roving bandits of Uttar Pradesh in competition with the biggest protection
[Unknown]: racket out there, the Indian state?
[Unknown]: All this and more in our new weekly podcast, Econ Central.
[Amit Varma]: Econ Central launched a few weeks ago and is free on all podcast apps.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse our archives at econcentral.in.
[Unknown]: Econ Central, you have an incentive to listen.
[Amit Varma]: Don't forget the URL, econcentral.in.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Parmesh Shani about his amazing book, Where Is Sun and indeed the
[Amit Varma]: journey that sort of led him to your book.
[Amit Varma]: Another phrase that really fascinated me in your book and got me to, you know, just stop
[Amit Varma]: reading and think about it for a bit was the phrase cultural acupuncture.
[Amit Varma]: You know, tell me a bit about this.
[Guest]: So it's, it's a phrase that I borrowed from the Harry Potter Alliance, you know, which
[Guest]: is incredible, which is, you know, Andrew Slack and the others founded it.
[Guest]: And it's a phrase that actually talks about, you know, using the framework of, you know,
[Guest]: popular culture to bring about social change.
[Guest]: So imagining the real world as like, you know, as one of these popular culture spaces to
[Guest]: imagine the real world as, you know, as a Star Wars universe or as this Harry Potter
[Guest]: universe.
[Guest]: What would it mean for young people to create Dumbledore's army and bring about this change?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So there are so many young people across fans, fans, young people across the world, who are
[Guest]: saying, can we create a Dumbledore's army to petition for trans rights or to petition
[Guest]: for a trans washroom in our school or college?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So using this popular imagination, and a lot of young people are doing that in the recent
[Guest]: Hong Kong protests.
[Guest]: You know, last year, you know, the Bruce Lee's, you know, still like water, imagery was used
[Guest]: a lot.
[Guest]: And Henry Jenkins, my guru taught me about this phrase when he came to India, we hosted
[Guest]: him, he visited us.
[Guest]: And I kind of liked it.
[Guest]: I use it in a different context.
[Guest]: I use it, you know, I, when I use it in the book, I, you know, I honor the origin of the
[Guest]: phrase and I honor the Harry Potter Alliance from where it came, but I use it more to describe
[Guest]: the kind of experiments that I am doing.
[Guest]: So I told you earlier in the interview that, you know, I think, why do I think top down
[Guest]: approach might be good, because I think you need to know where to press, you need to know
[Guest]: where to push to bring about that change, right?
[Guest]: And that's what acupuncture is, you put the needle in at the right place, you know, the
[Guest]: pain goes away or whatever.
[Guest]: And often you do it because you don't have resources to press everywhere.
[Guest]: You have a finite number of like, you know, things that you do, you need to find out where
[Guest]: to make that change.
[Guest]: So I use it to talk about the various points that I press both within Godrej and outside,
[Guest]: you know, within Godrej, through the lab, but also through the other kinds of influence
[Guest]: that I wield, whether it is with senior leaders, whether it is with, you know, helping curate
[Guest]: things like the leadership forum, which is a meeting of senior leaders, or whether it
[Guest]: is as been in utilizing the Godrej platform to talk about change to other companies and
[Guest]: other organizations.
[Guest]: So I use it to describe my method of bringing about change by pressing at the right notes.
[Guest]: And both these phrases come about early in the book, because I really want to give readers
[Guest]: a sense of what I've been trying to do, but also leave them with a template because you
[Guest]: know, I think of this book very much as my legacy.
[Guest]: And for all the young people who are reading it, I want them to read it and say, achha,
[Guest]: you know, maybe we can do this, right?
[Guest]: Because the people reading it can be, maybe some of them are in college, maybe some of
[Guest]: them are working.
[Guest]: I want them to use this as a method and say, okay, so you know, Parmesh could do this,
[Guest]: maybe we can go to our principal and say, what about this, right?
[Guest]: Or maybe we can tell, and it's already happening.
[Guest]: Like because Godrej has been talking about this and doing this, so many young HR people
[Guest]: I meet, tell me, you know, we told our boss, look, Godrej is doing this.
[Guest]: And also they said, okay, Godrej is doing this, we can also.
[Guest]: So you know, they are using this in a way to kind of get the permissions ready to bring
[Guest]: about the changes that they want to bring about.
[Amit Varma]: Another phrase in the book that I was struck by and that spoke to me was circulatory queerness.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, you speak about the many notions of the self.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to read that part out as well, where you say, in India, everything is inextricably
[Amit Varma]: tied to the idea of family and community.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe that is where we can locate the hyphenation.
[Amit Varma]: And you mean between Indian and queer.
[Amit Varma]: And then you continue, quote, this Western post-enlightenment idea of the self that needs
[Amit Varma]: to be found, that we need to be the best version of ourselves, that life is a journey of discovering
[Amit Varma]: and then polishing ourselves, is not so useful to us in India.
[Amit Varma]: Here we are many selves and there is no one self.
[Amit Varma]: And each of ourselves is conditional and contextual.
[Amit Varma]: And as we spend our lives navigating these multiple selves, it is important for workspaces
[Amit Varma]: to become crucibles of identity formation of some kind, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And later on, you elaborate on, you know, what it means when you say workplaces should
[Amit Varma]: become crucibles of identity formation, which was, again, a sort of a new thought to me,
[Amit Varma]: where, you know, you talk about how, you know, you spoke to an audience of Franklin Templeton
[Amit Varma]: employees in Mumbai, and you address HR managers, and you said that, you know, think about who
[Amit Varma]: your employees are, quote, someone who has been writing exams their whole life, maybe
[Amit Varma]: they did well in class 10, and then in class 12.
[Amit Varma]: And then so on, you sort of line them all up, GE, IIT, MBA, IIM, whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And then you write, quote, when these young employees come into your system, I told my
[Amit Varma]: Franklin Templeton audience, they are not fully developed, they know how to mug up write
[Amit Varma]: exams and pass test, they often sacrificed a lot in their quest to emerge from the narrow
[Amit Varma]: end of the funnel into your organization.
[Amit Varma]: And this includes sacrificing thinking of things such as their own identity, or what
[Amit Varma]: makes them happy, or gives them purpose in life, your workspace needs to welcome them
[Amit Varma]: to explore their multiple selves.
[Amit Varma]: You need to reassure them that it is okay to be who they are here, that they can engage
[Amit Varma]: with the identities that they often tend to suppress at home.
[Amit Varma]: As a consequence, an Indian corporate structure for an Indian LGBTQ person must be a space
[Amit Varma]: for reconciliation, stop code.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a fascinating message.
[Amit Varma]: And it's also sort of a fascinating message in the sense that I think many companies when
[Amit Varma]: you talk about LGBTQ rights, would respond to it from a perspective of okay, it makes
[Amit Varma]: sense we should not discriminate against them.
[Amit Varma]: But what you are saying here is that no, that is not enough, that there is more that you
[Amit Varma]: need to do.
[Amit Varma]: So expand a little bit on that kind of thinking.
[Amit Varma]: And how receptive have corporates been to it?
[Guest]: I think corporates have been incredibly receptive, because this is also linking to another theme
[Guest]: in the book, which is all about family, right?
[Guest]: So large parts of the book are about personal families, then families of choice, right?
[Guest]: Personal families when your own parents accept you, families of choice are the families that
[Guest]: you create.
[Guest]: So hijraf households are often families of choice, where you create family like structures
[Guest]: to either compensate for or to supplement, you know, the love that you get from your
[Guest]: birth families, right?
[Guest]: And then I actually say that workplaces have to act like families.
[Guest]: So I think it is very Indian, in this sense of saying that your workplace has to be a
[Guest]: space for reconciliation, because in so many other countries, you come out first at home,
[Guest]: and then you go to this workplace as this kind of well formed or whatever individual.
[Guest]: But in India, because of that passage you read out, right, and that is the experience
[Guest]: for so many people.
[Guest]: Anyway, where we talk about happiness, love, purpose, identity in our houses, forget sex
[Guest]: or gender, or like any of that, right, where we talk about these things.
[Guest]: So people are really, really, really, really need these spaces.
[Guest]: And this comes out of the hundreds of talks I've done on college campuses and in offices,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: When people come up to you, and they tell you, it's the first time you're hearing about
[Guest]: something like this.
[Guest]: Now, if you're 24, 25, and it's the first time you're hearing about something like this,
[Guest]: I just feel like, you know, what have you, how have you spent the rest of your life,
[Guest]: but you've not thought about something fundamental to who you are.
[Guest]: So I think the workplace has to be that.
[Guest]: And people understand, because that's the other thing when people, people who run companies,
[Guest]: people who are in HR departments are also human beings.
[Guest]: They've gone through the same process themselves.
[Guest]: So when you appeal to that inner humanness, when you say, look, you have families at home,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: You have children at home, you have this.
[Guest]: We need to act like good, what does it mean for you to be a good parent to your children
[Guest]: at home?
[Guest]: Can we not be good parents to our employees?
[Guest]: Given that this is the context, I mean, more often than not, I have found people getting
[Guest]: it and saying, okay, what would this mean, etc, right?
[Guest]: Then of course, it's, it's, I mean, it's manifested in multiple ways and policy changes and, you
[Guest]: know, and so on.
[Guest]: And then there are other challenges that come up.
[Guest]: How do you translate all this intent into practice?
[Guest]: But I think at a fundamental level, which is why this is such a desi book, when you
[Guest]: argue on this term, it's very hard for people to not understand.
[Guest]: And what I've done in the book is I've covered all grounds, right?
[Guest]: I've argued on a money term, we all love money.
[Guest]: I've said it makes you more money.
[Guest]: I've argued on an innovation term.
[Guest]: It makes you mine, not just me saying it, there's data that backs it.
[Guest]: I've argued on the talent term.
[Guest]: But above all, I'm saying, it's in our culture, we need to be like this.
[Guest]: We need to act like this.
[Guest]: It's who we are, right?
[Guest]: So I think I've made a pretty watertight case, in terms of whichever way you look at it,
[Guest]: whatever aspect of your mind or heart you want to be appealed to, I think the book serves
[Guest]: that purpose that you know, it shows very clearly, there's no reason to be not inclusive.
[Amit Varma]: No, and in fact, it kind of you have a chapter on how queerness is ingrained in our history,
[Amit Varma]: whether we are talking about ancient times or medieval times from a Hindu perspective
[Amit Varma]: or medieval times from, you know, an Islamic perspective all the way to the modern day.
[Amit Varma]: And that kind of kind of leaves me baffled, because then there is that paradox, that on
[Amit Varma]: the one hand, in our society, we have so much homophobia, or often just ignorance, while
[Amit Varma]: actually, you know, these modes of behavior and these modes of living have been ingrained
[Amit Varma]: in our society for way longer than before, you know, the West came up with words for
[Amit Varma]: it, like homosexuality or queerness or whatever, you know, and this dichotomy to me just sinking
[Amit Varma]: aloud extends much beyond this.
[Amit Varma]: It is, you know, I was once chatting with the politician JP Narayan about our society,
[Amit Varma]: and I described India as an illiberal society.
[Amit Varma]: And my reason for saying that, of course, was the way we treat our women and caste and
[Amit Varma]: all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: And he pointed out that from another point of view, we are a deeply liberal society,
[Amit Varma]: because, you know, it's so inclusive in terms of cultural influences, all our food, all
[Amit Varma]: our clothing, we take influences from everywhere, and we make them up.
[Amit Varma]: We are a Khichri of our nation, you know, I struggled to wrap my head around this paradox
[Amit Varma]: and this dichotomy.
[Guest]: What do you think of it?
[Guest]: I've also struggled to wrap my head around it, which is why one way of writing this book
[Guest]: has been to unravel some of this.
[Guest]: But my position is very clear that, I mean, I've written this book to unravel, but also,
[Guest]: I mean, the purpose of this book is very much to serve as a manual for change, right?
[Guest]: So try to make it like simple, and in that sense, very clear, understanding the paradoxes,
[Guest]: but simplifying it to a point of look.
[Guest]: I mean, it's very clear, right?
[Guest]: It's in our culture.
[Guest]: It's in our family values, our family values are to include, plus, there's all these other
[Guest]: benefits.
[Guest]: It makes you money, it makes you this, it makes you that.
[Guest]: So net net, it's good for you, whichever way you look at it.
[Guest]: I've not found one reason in my years of research that says that discriminating against someone
[Guest]: is bad for you.
[Guest]: Here are all the reasons that's good for you.
[Guest]: I've not found any reason why it might be bad for you.
[Amit Varma]: Not discriminating.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: So people seem to get it.
[Guest]: People don't think, I think a lot of the times there's so much noise, people kind of get
[Guest]: distracted by the noise, right?
[Guest]: So a lot of noise comes, this is against our culture, but when you say actually, no, no,
[Guest]: no, let me show you how it's in our culture, oh yeah, it is in our culture.
[Guest]: You've forgotten it, which is why I think the work of scholars like Ruth Vanita and
[Guest]: Salim Kidwai, or writers like Devdutt Patnayak, who have popularized mythology so much over
[Guest]: the years, is so vital because in a way, Devdutt in his writing, I mean, whether it's very
[Guest]: directly in Ashikhandi and other stories they don't tell you, or indirectly in, I would
[Guest]: say most of Devdutt's other works, is about equality, plurality, inclusiveness, widening
[Guest]: one's horizon about the idea of India, and recognizing that a lot of this, right?
[Guest]: Even Ruth and Salim write in, you know, their same-sex love in India, that homophobia is
[Guest]: something that was imported into India with the British. And, you know, they left 70 years
[Guest]: ago. I find it tragic that, you know, homophobia remains. I think it's time we sent it off
[Guest]: packing as well. And maybe we can get the Kohinoor diamond back. You know, take your
[Guest]: homophobia back and give us back our diamond.
[Amit Varma]: I completely agree with you about giving homophobia away, but the ghar-wapsi of the Kohinoor diamond
[Guest]: I think is unnecessary.
[Guest]: I will wear it. I have the perfect setting for it, darling.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, that would be even more visualization, as you say, for your audiences, if you wear
[Amit Varma]: the Kohinoor diamond on stage. Let's move on to another fascinating section on your
[Amit Varma]: book, the third of five parts, where you, in a series of different chapters, you lay
[Amit Varma]: out different aspects of the case for inclusion, and you begin it with a chapter on the meta
[Amit Varma]: issues. And I really like that, because it struck me that the case for inclusion can
[Amit Varma]: be made through two different prisms, just as I have always thought about the case for
[Amit Varma]: individual freedom. Like I've always argued that you can make a case for individual freedom
[Amit Varma]: on purely moral terms, deontological terms, where you say that it is good in and of itself,
[Amit Varma]: you have to respect individual autonomy and consent and all of that. But you can also
[Amit Varma]: make the case for individual freedom, whether in the marketplace or the bedroom, from a
[Amit Varma]: consequentialist point of view, and say that it's not just better for the individuals involved,
[Amit Varma]: but for society as a whole, if all of us are, you know, free to express ourselves and to
[Amit Varma]: live our lives as we please, provided we don't infringe the right of others. Now, so the
[Amit Varma]: case can be made both ways. And it's often a strategic choice, right? If you're making
[Amit Varma]: the case, which way do you make it? And you've spoken about the same sort of dilemma about
[Amit Varma]: making the case for inclusion, where you end up making it in, you know, three excellent
[Amit Varma]: chapters in consequentialist terms by pointing out that companies in their self interest
[Amit Varma]: should be inclusive, because, you know, ABC, which we'll discuss. And of course, you also
[Amit Varma]: point out the moral case for it, you and you discuss a dialogue with a friend of yours
[Amit Varma]: who was saying no, it should only be the moral case, the rest of it may change with fashion
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. And I actually agree with you on this and not so much with your friend,
[Amit Varma]: because I think that even though individuals, you know, you can appeal to their sense of
[Amit Varma]: morality, companies are finally a moral beast. So appealing to that kind of self interest
[Amit Varma]: of this will make us more money, this will get us better employees is a good case to
[Amit Varma]: make, especially since as you've shared in the book, and, you know, I've also spoken
[Amit Varma]: about elsewhere, there is so much data to back up the benefits of diversity. But tell
[Amit Varma]: me a bit about each of those three cases that you make for why corporations should be inclusive
[Amit Varma]: and should, you know, go out of their way to be LGBTQ friendly. Yeah, so I, and you
[Guest]: know, I told you earlier, I'm a maximalist. So why do one when you can buy one argument
[Guest]: when you can have four. And I'm glad you're coming to this side of the spectrum, Amit,
[Guest]: with like, you know, minimalistic arguments are pointless. So welcome. I'm happy that
[Guest]: over the course of this podcast, I have taken you a little bit into excess. So I think,
[Guest]: and that initial thing is very important, right? Because this is also a, I mean, this
[Guest]: is a moral, it's a moral dilemma for inclusion advocates all over the world, right? I'm saying
[Guest]: that this is, it's deeply personal. Queer people are four to 6% of the population. But
[Guest]: even morally, even if there's just one queer person in the world, it should be inclusive.
[Guest]: And if you base it on business, and so on, then you are in a sense, are you diminishing
[Guest]: the moral case for it, and so on. But over the years, I mean, people are recognizing
[Guest]: that, you know, I've anyway never believed in either or kind of things. I've always been
[Guest]: a big advocate of both. So I think, I mean, this fits in very much with that. And I this
[Guest]: is what I was seeing on the ground. So I put in, I made the case for it on all these terms,
[Guest]: because I was seeing all these terms play themselves out on the ground, right? There
[Guest]: is a clear moral case for inclusion, you know, which I've laid out from a human rights or
[Guest]: just from whatever a decency perspective. I mean, it's a no brainer. Should we be decent
[Guest]: to everyone? And treat everyone the same? Of course. And how novel and radical that
[Guest]: I have to have a whole chapter in the book telling people why decency is a good thing.
[Guest]: But there you have it. We do. Having said that, the other things I thought were very
[Guest]: important, because, you know, we don't have data out of India as such, but there is enough
[Guest]: data coming from other parts of the world that tell you that make very direct links
[Guest]: between profitability, you know, both the company's profitability and the level of the
[Guest]: inclusion as well as, you know, things like GDP, the economy and so on. Just to give you
[Guest]: some numbers, the market size of India's queer economy is about $200 billion with a B. This
[Guest]: is assuming, you know, 4 to 10% of the population is queer. That's a lot of money. Who wants
[Guest]: a piece of that queer market? I know I do. Working in a company, certainly so many others,
[Guest]: so many of your podcast listeners who are corporate people will say, hey, we want a
[Guest]: bit of this market. So one way of getting it is by being inclusive, you know, to your
[Guest]: queer employees, present and future, to your customers, indicating your customers that
[Guest]: this is what you stand for. And, you know, as we have shown with other companies, you
[Guest]: know, you will support it. And there's enough case studies about this, whether it's Subaru
[Guest]: in the West or like Lalit Hotels or whatever in India, and so on. Companies that stand
[Guest]: up for what they believe in make more money. And likewise, I mean, the World Bank did this
[Guest]: incredible report in 2014, which looked at the cost of homophobia. And Leigh Badgett,
[Guest]: who authored this, has gone on record to say that the number that she initially thought
[Guest]: of, which was $32 billion is the cost of homophobia in India for that year, which was 2012, is
[Guest]: a conservative number, which means in that year, $32 billion was about 1% of the GDP
[Guest]: that year. And so the World Bank and Leigh Badgett's case was that if India had been
[Guest]: more inclusive that year, they would have got a bump of GDP bump of 1%. And that is
[Guest]: huge, which finance minister does not want this GDP bump of 1%, right? I mean, I think
[Guest]: it would be very prudent for people to understand these studies and the direct links as so many
[Guest]: other countries have done, as so many other cities have done, and so on, right? Then the
[Guest]: second case is a link between innovation and being inclusive. And this, I mean, it should
[Guest]: be a no brainer. But you know, when there are people making decisions, when everyone
[Guest]: around the table looks the same and sounds the same, it's very hard to be innovative,
[Guest]: because you are thinking about life from your perspective, right? If there are 10 people
[Guest]: around the table, working on the design of a sanitary napkin for the future, it's going
[Guest]: to be and they all happen to be, you know, male, it would be very hard. The design would
[Guest]: be much better if you widen that to include even one woman in that group, because you
[Guest]: know, she'll say, well, you know, being a woman as someone who might have used this
[Guest]: product, can I just tell you this, this, this, right? And then your product becomes better,
[Guest]: whatever, right? Would it be better if you had two? Yes, of course, then a range of other
[Guest]: and so on, right? So basic example, but just to say that, you know, the more diverse teams
[Guest]: you have, and diversities across various pillars, gender is one, ability is one, if you have
[Guest]: PWDs on your team, you can help imagine better things. If you have people who might be LGBT
[Guest]: on your team, it might be better. Caste is an important pillar of diversity in our country
[Guest]: as well. And so many other, you know, frameworks, religion, caste, age, so many of these other
[Guest]: things, right, which are different pillars of diversity. And there is enough research
[Guest]: that now shows that companies that have more diverse teams, innovate better, their products
[Guest]: do better in the market, and have better outcomes, which eventually leads to more money. So even
[Guest]: the innovation case is very, very clear, you know, the more innovative you are, the better
[Amit Varma]: you will do, the more money you will make. In fact, I've spoken in past episodes about
[Amit Varma]: studies which show that the most important factor in good decision making is not IQ or
[Amit Varma]: education or any of those things. It's diversity, because you just have so many different viewpoints
[Amit Varma]: coming in that there will be people thinking out of your box, not necessarily out of the
[Amit Varma]: box, but out of your box. And it's important to have that for its own sake, which doesn't
[Amit Varma]: mean that, you know, you value diversity over any of these other attributes necessarily.
[Amit Varma]: But I would say the way I would interpret is that whenever you can choose between two
[Amit Varma]: equal candidates, choose the one who will, you know, improve your diversity. And ultimately,
[Amit Varma]: that affects the bottom line. And as you point out, so many studies have shown. And that's
[Guest]: what positive discrimination essentially is, right? To say that, how can you widen your,
[Guest]: you know, your pool of talent to reflect the world outside because people, I mean, you're
[Guest]: employees, your customers, other stakeholders are living in this world outside in which
[Guest]: they are witnessing diversity. So in any society, four to 10% of people are queer, there are
[Guest]: disabled people, and there are people of color, you know, etc. Why is that diversity not being
[Guest]: reflected in workplaces? I mean, that's the question, right? And if that diversity was
[Guest]: reflected in workplaces, if you had workplaces which are more reflective of the world that
[Guest]: we are living in, you know, it would be better. I mean, it's not rocket science. It's actually
[Guest]: quite simple, right? And this is not true of just a corporate level, it's true of cities
[Guest]: and countries. So Richard Florida, you know, has done work now for about 15-20 years on
[Guest]: cities. And he wrote this incredible book called The Rise of the Creative Class some
[Guest]: years ago, which made a direct correlation between, you know, cities and their productivity
[Guest]: and the output. And he had certain parameters, which he looked at, that linked the city's
[Guest]: competitive index, and one of which was that is the city more inclusive to LGBTQ people.
[Guest]: And since then, the work has expanded to look at countries to look at regions and so on.
[Guest]: And in every case, it's very, very clear, at the city level, at the region level, at
[Guest]: a state level, at a country level, if you are more inclusive, you do better. And you
[Guest]: in every way, including financially, right? So even say in the US, right? Other parts
[Guest]: of the US might be having recessions. But you know, certain regions, right, whether
[Guest]: it's San Francisco, Palo Alto, New York, etc, are thriving, because they have been so inclusive
[Guest]: in so many ways, that talent gravitates over there, talent gravitates, innovative ideas
[Guest]: come from there, innovative ideas come from there, it benefits the economy, and things
[Guest]: like that, right. So there are so many countries like Chile, who started Startup Chile programs,
[Guest]: welcoming innovative people into their country. And you know, countries like Israel, Chile,
[Guest]: and all have made innovation, like one of the key things that they want to import talent,
[Guest]: because they recognize that the future of the countries is going to be based on the
[Guest]: talent that they can attract. And if you want to attract global talent, you have to be that
[Guest]: kind of society that global talent will want to navigate, gravitate towards, right. So
[Guest]: I mean, that's, you know, on innovation on multiple levels. And I also write in the chapter
[Guest]: about how we want to preserve our talent. And one of the, say, in the IIT petition,
[Guest]: for example, in the 2018, you know, hearing, so many of the IIT students had said that,
[Guest]: you know, they were considering so many of their, you know, former IIT graduates had
[Guest]: already migrated to countries like Canada, etc. Not for anything else, but other that
[Guest]: they did not feel comfortable living in India at that time. So my question is, why should
[Guest]: our best talent be migrating away to other queer friendly countries? Why don't we create
[Guest]: a queer friendly environment so that, because we have spent our taxpayer money, you know,
[Guest]: into educating all these IIT students, it's our money that's gone into educating them.
[Guest]: And they want to leave and go to other parts of the world, because those parts are more
[Guest]: queer friendly. Why don't we just create a more queer friendly environment so our talent
[Guest]: can remain here, and then add to the innovation, potential and output of our economy. So this
[Guest]: bit is a little nationalistic, but I mean, you know, it makes sense, right? I mean, we
[Guest]: want, so from every perspective that you look at, I mean, you know, the link between innovation
[Guest]: and inclusion is very clear. And then finally, I go on into, you know, into talent, into
[Guest]: reputation, talking about Millennials and Gen Zs, and how in today's world, you know,
[Guest]: it is a reputation economy, and how young people really, really want to either buy products
[Guest]: from or work at companies that are standing up and doing the right thing. And for them,
[Guest]: caring for the environment, caring for, you know, thinking about diversity and inclusion.
[Guest]: And you know, there are a bunch of things which are the right thing. So you know, I
[Guest]: mean, those, these are the pillars on which I make my argument.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, the three basic pillars. One is it will directly lead you to profit. Two is that it
[Amit Varma]: will attract innovative people. And as you point out in that chapter on, you know, attracting
[Amit Varma]: innovative people, it creates a virtuous cycle. Because once you have innovation and inclusion
[Amit Varma]: within a company, you know, more and more people will want to work in that place, not
[Amit Varma]: just LGBTQ people, but people who just like that openness and the sort of the innovation
[Amit Varma]: that happens from there. I mean, again, personal flashback came here. I remember when I sort
[Amit Varma]: of graduated from college in 94. I worked for a year in advertising in Delhi. And then
[Amit Varma]: I moved to Bombay to work at channel B, I just gave up my job. And I just landed there.
[Amit Varma]: And why? Because I saw so much creativity coming out of there at the time, like if you
[Amit Varma]: remember quick gun, gun, and so on. And of course, I didn't create anything remotely
[Amit Varma]: that creative, which is entirely to do with me and not to do with channel B. But and later
[Amit Varma]: on, I remember when I was working at Crick Info in the early 2000s, and there was so
[Amit Varma]: much great cricket writing that automatically, you know, once you established yourself as
[Amit Varma]: a place where there is good writing happening, anybody who wanted to write like that would
[Amit Varma]: gravitate towards you. And, you know, we became a magnet for young writing talent, many of
[Amit Varma]: whom have gone on to do great writing, apart from cricket. So that's a great point. And
[Amit Varma]: your third point was about just the reputational benefits that, you know, if you have that
[Amit Varma]: warm, fuzzy feeling about a company, or even at an intellectual level, a sense of admiration
[Amit Varma]: for what they're doing, you are more likely to buy their products, like, again, contextualizing
[Amit Varma]: this to myself, I remember a few years ago, I went to Costa once, and I said something
[Amit Varma]: to the waiter, and he couldn't hear me. And then I realized that they're hiring, you know,
[Amit Varma]: deaf and dumb stuff. And, you know, as a company policy, and immediately, then that increases
[Amit Varma]: your loyalty to that particular place, because you're like that, you know, wow, this is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and so those knock on benefits also, you know, are there. Now, let's let's kind
[Amit Varma]: of move on to you know, the fourth section of your book is a fascinating five step guide
[Amit Varma]: for what companies can do for, you know, having now that you've sold them the case, that inclusion
[Amit Varma]: is good for you, how do they become inclusive, and you've got this guide for that. So can
[Amit Varma]: you take us through, you know, some of the points that you've kind of raised in that?
[Guest]: Well, I do want them to buy the book also. So I don't want to take them through so many
[Guest]: points that they don't buy the book. But I will briefly, we are running out of time anyway.
[Guest]: So we'll cover this briefly. I mean, this is think of this as the tasting menu, not
[Guest]: the main course. And, you know, the main course is very good. So you have to come. I think
[Amit Varma]: I think, you know, even the subjects that we have discussed, you know, we have just
[Amit Varma]: touched the surface of it. And people really have to buy the book to get a full sense of
[Guest]: the depth of the arguments and the data presented. So I think that goes without saying, I don't
[Guest]: worry about that, my listeners buy books.
[Guest]: Very good. I'm so glad. So since you all buy books, you can feel free to buy it in all
[Guest]: formats. It's a paper book, there's a Kindle, there's also Audible, you can buy it in all
[Amit Varma]: formats. Now having sold that.
[Amit Varma]: Not just that, buy multiple copies and gift it to people who you think they need to be
[Amit Varma]: gifted to.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's bright, it's colorful. It's a perfect gift for anything, whichever festival is coming
[Amit Varma]: up, you know, gifted.
[Amit Varma]: Though the picture of you in it is like, almost besides a bow tie, it's a very boring corporatish
[Guest]: picture.
[Guest]: You have to do this in the line, right?
[Guest]: Serious.
[Guest]: Yeah, but next edition, we'll do something more flamboyant. So just to give you an overview
[Guest]: of in terms of the different sections, I mean, in terms of, it starts with basic policies
[Guest]: that one can change right from having an anti-discrimination policy. And I make it very easy. I give you
[Guest]: the Godrej, a large part of the book, I'm just giving you, I'm saying, here's what we
[Guest]: have at Godrej, copy and paste it, okay? Because a lot of people who are reading it might say,
[Guest]: oh, now we don't know how to make one, how to make one, it's there, you know, use it,
[Guest]: we don't mind, there's no copyright. Use it.
[Guest]: So what is an anti-discrimination policy? I tell you, I say you can use this. What does
[Guest]: it mean to have, you know, a more comprehensive posh policy? We put that in. So a lot of policies
[Guest]: and benefits. What are benefits? Same sex partnership benefits. Here is what they are.
[Guest]: And this is what we offer. Gender affirmation, surgery and benefits. This is what it means.
[Guest]: This is, you know, so all the early, the first step is just, you know, having all of this
[Guest]: in place. And then I also say, don't have it and do it quietly, right? You're doing
[Guest]: this, you must make some noise about it so that people know. Now, having the policies
[Guest]: and benefits in place doesn't mean that tomorrow, like hundreds of people will come out and
[Guest]: start using it, right? Because people are not closeted because you don't, people are
[Guest]: closeted because of various things. So you might have the best policies and benefits,
[Guest]: but you might not have a culture of inclusion. So people might want to avail of it, but they
[Guest]: might be afraid, okay, if I come out, will my boss treat me differently or will my coworkers
[Guest]: and will my dad, right? So you have to supplement your policy and benefits with a whole bunch
[Guest]: of other things. And so all those other steps are about these other things. Like, what does
[Guest]: it mean to sensitize people within, right? How are the different ways you can sensitize?
[Guest]: And I show people, whether through workshops, whether through roundtables, whether through
[Guest]: carnivals, what does sensitization mean? How do you go out and actively recruit LGBTQ people?
[Guest]: Because now there's an ecosystem. Say you're, you want to be LGBTQ friendly and you know,
[Guest]: you want to say, okay, I'm sure I have queer employees. I'm going to do all of this, but
[Guest]: I'd like to attract more queer talent. Now there's a whole, there are consulting companies
[Guest]: that are job fairs. There is a whole, there's so much that you can do, including basic things,
[Guest]: like even just signaling. This is what Ali Portia from McKinsey told me. You can put
[Guest]: even all your posts on naukri.com. You know, even if you just put one rainbow around it,
[Guest]: the queer people who are reading it will understand, Oh, they're queer friendly. Maybe I can apply
[Guest]: or whatever. You don't have to say they're queer friendly. Basic signaling also goes
[Guest]: a long way, right? And that's the thing. So it tells you about how you can, you know,
[Guest]: participate and create this. There's a specific chapter on, on all the things that you have
[Guest]: to be careful and mindful about when you are reaching out to trans employees, because trans
[Guest]: employees have a unique set of needs. And so as a company, you have to be more sensitive.
[Guest]: Basic stuff, right? A trans person might have a 10 standard school leaving certificate with
[Guest]: one gender and might have transitioned to something else. So you have to tell your HR
[Guest]: department, please don't create difficulties and say, but your school leaving certificate
[Guest]: says Mr. And now you are Miss and all that. You have to understand and you have to accept
[Guest]: and you have to say, fine, we accept this certificate and we accept this also. Like
[Guest]: that there are so many other things, right? We spoke about Kochi Metro earlier and saying
[Guest]: how you might have to help with housing, opening bank accounts, so many other things, right?
[Guest]: The other thing is with trans people, often because of systematic discrimination, levels
[Guest]: of education might not be so high. So when you are, if you're serious about hiring trans
[Guest]: people, you might want to do a combination of skill building and training and hiring,
[Guest]: which is what, you know, ANZ and so many of these other, you know, banks have done to
[Guest]: great success, you know, working with community organizations, doing a skill building workshop
[Guest]: for six weeks. And, you know, then the 25 trans people who've attended the skill building
[Guest]: workshops, the ones that do well, get absorbed into the company and the ones that the company
[Guest]: does not want gives, they are given certificates and, you know, then they have a better chance
[Guest]: of working with other companies and so on. So, I mean, it's a useful chapter in that
[Guest]: sense. So I end by talking about how, if you really want to go the whole hog, then you
[Guest]: have to really talk about it to the world because, you know, I, I personally don't think
[Guest]: being in, I mean, you know, I think it's everyone's choice, but I think you shouldn't be a closeted
[Guest]: company also, because in the words of the famous Rakhi Sawant, jo dikhta hai, wo bikhta
[Guest]: hai. So if you are being inclusive, why not tell the world about it and show it to the
[Guest]: world and get the love and appreciation that the world will give you for it. So don't be
[Guest]: closeted, talk about it at public forums, visibly support queer culture by sponsoring
[Guest]: film festivals, you know, literature festivals, pride marches, whatever it takes. Support
[Guest]: your employees when they want to go on things like that. Help community organizations through
[Guest]: your CSR in whatever way you can. Just be an out and proud ally, because, you know,
[Guest]: the love and affection and market share and everything else that you will get in it is
[Guest]: far greater than you will put in it. That I can guarantee you. So, you know, it's a
[Guest]: multiple step approach. I hope everyone who reads it follows all the steps.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you are the first person on my show to quote Rakhi Sawant as a management guru.
[Amit Varma]: That was fascinating. I have two final questions for you. My penultimate question is this,
[Amit Varma]: that what we often see in social movements is that sometimes a cause can be hurt by radical
[Amit Varma]: fringes and there is a danger of going too far. For example, you know, you've spoken
[Amit Varma]: very wisely of the many cells within us, that our identity is not just focused around, you
[Amit Varma]: know, one aspect, but various aspects and they all come together. But it strikes me
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, this deep focus on, you know, particular strands of our identity can sometimes
[Amit Varma]: get reductive, you know, if you if you focus too hard on it, and you build these narratives
[Amit Varma]: of oppression and victimhood and so on. And I think they don't have enough respect for
[Amit Varma]: individual complexity and individual autonomy. And those can get eroded, where you just,
[Amit Varma]: you know, once you embrace that narrative of yourself as a victim, you might be condemning
[Amit Varma]: yourself to a perpetual feeling of victimhood, which can't be good. And, you know, which
[Amit Varma]: is something that one could otherwise get across. Now, you know, without sort of getting
[Amit Varma]: into specifics, is this something that you think about? I mean, even within this movement,
[Amit Varma]: of course, it's one thing that there are many differences, but those differences get, you
[Amit Varma]: know, more and more heated over time, you know, just a few months ago, JK Rowling would
[Amit Varma]: have been considered such an ally of the movement. And then there was this, you know, vociferous
[Amit Varma]: backlash against her and she was called transphobic and all of that, without getting into the
[Amit Varma]: merits of the case per se, is that perhaps an issue of too much zealotry here and also
[Amit Varma]: of the reductiveness, which is kind of dangerous, where you only see yourself as x, without
[Amit Varma]: accepting that we all contain the whole alphabet within us to varying degrees.
[Guest]: So very briefly, yes, I think, off late, and you know, certainly social media, etc, have
[Guest]: amplified a lot of, it has been very easy for a lot of people to take positions and
[Guest]: it's not just social media, if you look at the nature of our television, if you look
[Guest]: at the overall toxicity, not just in India, all over the world, I would say, in terms
[Guest]: of, you know, position taking and attacking the other and so on. So I think it's very
[Guest]: easy to lose out on nuance, it's very easy to, it's much easier for people to look at
[Guest]: what the differences between each other than what unites us commonly. And certainly within
[Guest]: the queer movement, we have seen in India and other parts of the world, it's easier
[Guest]: to like have differences than to say that, you know, we are under one common umbrella.
[Guest]: I'm not, one can recognize that one is under one common umbrella and still recognize the
[Guest]: issues with it with that umbrella, right? I've always said, I think the queer movement
[Guest]: really, we also need to deeply reflect. And this book is also a call to the queer movement
[Guest]: to ask ourselves, what histories are we telling? Whose histories are we telling? But having
[Guest]: said that, I'm given that at least, you know, this book, and this book is very much set
[Guest]: in business. And it's very much a call to action. And it's an action oriented book.
[Guest]: I like what Devdutt calls samvad, not vivad. So I like conversations, not confrontations.
[Guest]: I'm very okay with disagreements. You know, I think the world would be very boring without
[Guest]: disagreements. But I like disagreements that are respectful. And you know, we don't always
[Guest]: have to agree on, you know, each other's perspectives.
[Amit Varma]: So you won't stop talking to me just because I don't like Shahrukh?
[Guest]: No, I mean, will I try overtly and covertly to influence you to become a Shahrukh fan?
[Guest]: Of course. But that is samvad, no? I mean, I won't say you like Shahrukh. I was like,
[Guest]: no, okay, there's hope here. Let me show you. Have you seen Paheli? It's an underrated gem.
[Guest]: Maybe you like Shahrukh after that, right? And even if you don't, if you don't, then
[Guest]: I would say, okay, you're missing out a lot. What can I say? Maybe we can find something
[Guest]: else to bond over. But my aim, that's my thing, right? I mean, so even with this book, right,
[Guest]: the aim is very much to get people to hire more queer people like me. I mean, if the
[Guest]: book has been written as a manifesto to get people to understand that queer people matter,
[Guest]: we need jobs, we need recognitions, we need equality. And with that stated aim in mind,
[Guest]: I think samvad is a better answer, within the movement and outside. Because when you
[Guest]: do samvad, you always leave the door open for possibilities. I think more and more when
[Guest]: we do vivaad, we shut those doors. And I think where the world is going, the more doors we
[Amit Varma]: open, the more bridges we build, it's better.
[Amit Varma]: Very wise words. And I would just add to that by saying that I found your book such a wonderful
[Amit Varma]: read that I think either of those terms memoir and manifesto or even both of them together
[Amit Varma]: don't do justice to it. So I, you know, recommend everybody pick it up and read it even if you
[Amit Varma]: feel that, hey, this subject doesn't link, you know, interest me, I'm not LGBTQ, why
[Amit Varma]: should I read this, even then it will open your eyes to the world around us. And a lot
[Amit Varma]: of it is just universal, like, so many passages within it spoke so intimately to me, like
[Amit Varma]: what you wrote about many selves and so on. For a final question, I'll turn away from
[Amit Varma]: the book and back to you.
[Amit Varma]: Rapid fire, rapid fire. Is that a hamper?
[Amit Varma]: I'm sorry. This is a virtual, this thing. I could give you a virtual hamper. You know,
[Guest]: what is it?
[Amit Varma]: Sir, I am humble person. I am not Kejo. I am Eva. Eva sounds good, actually. Yeah. Okay.
[Amit Varma]: So I watched this interview of yours from 10 years ago on this excellent series called
[Amit Varma]: Project Bolo. All these links will be in the show notes, by the way. So please check them
[Amit Varma]: out. So the excellent series called Project Bolo, which had conversations with various
[Amit Varma]: people from within the movement about their lived experiences and so on. And in that interview
[Amit Varma]: of yours, you know, this quote struck me and this was 10 years ago. So I asked you about
[Amit Varma]: it today. And you said, I want to live in interesting times, stop quote. And now that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the preceding 10 years have certainly included many interesting times. And I'm going
[Amit Varma]: to end this show with my staple question to all my guests that looking ahead, maybe just
[Amit Varma]: looking ahead 10 years and not too much. What gives you hope and what gives you despair?
[Guest]: What gives me hope are all the young people that I have met on this journey. The world,
[Guest]: the future of the world, not just the queer movement in India belongs to the young. And
[Guest]: whether it is young queer people, you know, I write in this book about this incredible
[Guest]: young poet in Jabalpur who is out to his family and whose father buys him mascara very normally,
[Guest]: you know, to this wonderful lesbian couple I met in Lucknow. We're living a very happy
[Guest]: life together to the young founders of these brilliant, you know, intersectional queer
[Guest]: spaces across the country, whether it's Yaal in Manipur, Zookia in Assam, Queerabad in
[Guest]: Ahmedabad, you know, Queer Alankar, there's so many, right? There's Awad Queer Festival,
[Guest]: like there's so many festivals, organizations, places, things, Chinky Homo Project out of
[Guest]: Delhi that addresses Northeast. I spoke about Grace Bhanu already and A Bond of Interest,
[Guest]: you know, Pink List, which is at the intersection of political activism and queerness. You know,
[Guest]: I just, you know, there's a whole list. And I end the book with about 200 of these organizations
[Guest]: and Dalit Queer Project, Queer Muslim Project, all of which are looking at various aspects
[Guest]: of queerness. So what gives me hope are these incredible young rainbow warriors striving
[Guest]: to really not just imagine people like Jyoti Chand, right, who have come out, who are out
[Guest]: and proud and running for the country. People like Narthaki Nataraj was honored by the present
[Guest]: government with the Padma Bhushan, you know, for as the first transgender, I think that
[Guest]: the first transgender dancer to win this award. So many state governments, I would say, across
[Guest]: the country who are recognizing that inclusion is an imperative and are slowly building the
[Guest]: networks for it, whether through welfare boards like, you know, Maharashtra, Kerala, Tamil
[Guest]: Nadu, and so on, or other initiatives. So, I mean, what gives me hope are these young,
[Guest]: incredible changemakers who are in a sense, pushing everyone around them to imagine, to
[Guest]: create and to live in this, you know, tomorrow, which I've called with great love and affection
[Guest]: Queeristan. What scares me is that our present generation might disappoint them. You know,
[Guest]: the passion and the power of their dreams, and the interconnected equal world that this
[Guest]: tomorrow's generation is imagining is so strong and so beautiful. And I really wish and hope
[Guest]: that some of us who are running the world today, either join these tomorrow's queer,
[Guest]: you know, action superstars, or step out of the way, but not get into their way. So that
[Guest]: is what gives me, you know, that is my fear. Your words of hope are very inspiring. But
[Amit Varma]: I have to say that, you know, your words of despair are a bit overstated, because I don't
[Amit Varma]: think you'll disappoint anybody with this wonderful, remarkable book, which I think
[Amit Varma]: will be read for hopefully decades from now. Parmesh, thank you so much for coming on my
[Guest]: show. It was so good to catch up with you again after so long. Thank you. And it was
[Guest]: exactly three hours. So it's perfect. It's the length of a wonderful, old style Bollywood
[Amit Varma]: film with Shahrukh Khan. See, I know now that if you compare me with Shahrukh Khan, Shahrukh
[Amit Varma]: is winning. So this is, but, you know, thanks a lot. I'm going to go and, you know, search
[Amit Varma]: for Paheli now and watch it just out of respect for you, Parmesh.
[Guest]: Thank you. And to everyone who's listening, thank you so much. Lots and lots of love.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, do check out my show notes for links to much of what
[Amit Varma]: we discussed today. These include links to Parmesh's wonderful books, Queeristan and
[Amit Varma]: Gay Bombay. Do pick them up. And if you like them, do give them to friends who you think
[Amit Varma]: might appreciate them. You can follow Parmesh on Twitter at Parmesh S. You can follow me
[Amit Varma]: at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of The Seen and the Unseen
[Amit Varma]: at SeenUnseen.in. Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Seen and the Unseen? If so, would you like to support
[Amit Varma]: the production of the show? You can go over to SeenUnseen.in slash support and contribute
[Amit Varma]: any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking. Thank you.